hello everyone
i've begun to
consider using my youtube channel and
podcast
for material
generated by people other than myself
i recently
put up a lecture by jonathan pagio that
was delivered to the jung society in
montreal i thought it was particularly
brilliant
discussion of the
underlying
narrative structure and conceptual
structure of genesis i added that
to the sequence of my videos on genesis
my wife is going to be releasing a
series of interviews with jonathan pagio
as part of her
investigation into the nature of the
divine feminine so that's coming up soon
and
in this
instance i'm
i asked my friend and colleague
psychiatrist dr neumann deutsch
to read a essay he wrote a few weeks ago
called needlepoints which is the most
penetrating analysis that i've read
about
the covid policies that have bedeviled
and
helped us
over the last few years
dr deutch is a psychiatrist and a
psychoanalyst and a solid scientist
renowned for his writing on science and
the brain and in my opinion canada's
most literate physician writer
he's also a friend and colleague of mine
he wrote the introduction to 12 rules of
life
his essay needlepoints which he's
reading today first appeared a few weeks
ago in tablet magazine but it's perhaps
even more relevant today like me
dr deutsch is vaccinated he describes
the history of vaccines praises what he
calls the kernel insight and makes a
solid an intelligent case for the
utility of the technology then he
details the coveted state of mind
describes the working and nature of the
brain circuits triggered by contagion
and helps explain why the issue of
vaccination is tearing families
friendships professions and even states
apart
he describes why debates about
vaccination and infection policies are
always emotionally radioactive on both
sides of the debate showing us why our
reason is threatened during contagion
detailing why we are then tempted to
treat each other
so badly
he explains why those who hesitate in
the face of the current policies
surrounding vaccination
have concerns more justified by history
and experience than they are often
credited with particularly when their
views are caricatured and demonized
he makes the case that the best path
through the current crisis is not
through coercion
that such coercion is in fact a reliable
indicator of failed government
communication and policy
dr deutsch describes the alternative
participatory model in which humane
physicians speak to patients
respectfully and as individuals with
their own agency and explains that those
who adopt this approach do much better
public health work
as would governments if they wished to
enhance instead of degrade trust in
public health i've now shared this
article with conservatives and liberals
alike in canada and democrats and
republicans in the u.s many of them all
who have received it and read it in this
polarized time have expressed their
appreciation for its content and its
writer
dr norman deutsch
did his homework as he always does
he's the author of the brain that
changes itself and is currently a
contributing writer for tablet magazine
where this article is published and
where all the links to the scientific
references he quotes can be found
he's also executive director of health
and the greater good a new think tank
devoted to finding solutions to health
problems that respect civil liberties so
that neither health
nor civil liberties need needlessly be
at the expense of the other
i wanted to bring this article to the
broadest public attention possible given
its importance and felt that having dr
deutch
read it so that people could watch it
and listen to it on youtube and in
podcasts assuming that would be the most
effective way to disseminate the
information
so without further ado dr norman deutsch
and needlepoints
needle points
why so many are hesitant to get the
covert vaccines
and what we can do about it
by norman deutsch
read by the author
october 27
since my days in medical school
i've had a fascination with the kernel
insight behind vaccination
that one could successfully expose a
person to an attenuated version of a
microbe
that would prepare and protect them for
a potentially lethal encounter with the
actual microbe
i marveled at how it tutors an immune
system
that like the brain
has memory and a kind of intelligence
and even something akin to foresight
but i loved it for a broader reason too
at times modern science and modern
medicine
seem based on a fantasy that imagines
the role of medicine
is to conquer nature
as though we can wage a war against all
microbes with antimicrobials to create a
world where we will no longer suffer
from infectious disease
vaccination is not based
on that sterile vision but it's opposite
it works with our educable immune system
which evolved millions of years ago
to deal with the fact that we must
always co-exist with microbes
it helps us to use our own resources to
protect ourselves
doing so is in accord with the essential
insight of hippocrates who understood
that the major part of healing comes
from within
that it is best to work with nature and
not against it
and yet
ever since they were made available
vaccines have been controversial
and it has almost always been difficult
to have a non-emotionally charged
discussion about them
one reason is that in humans
and other animals
any infection can trigger an archaic
brain circuit
in most of us called the behavioral
immune system or bis
it's a circuit that's triggered when we
sense we may be near a potential carrier
of disease
causing disgust
fear and avoidance
it's involuntary and not easy to shut
off once it's been turned on
the behavioral inhuman system is best
understood in contrast to the regular
immune system
the regular immune system consists of
antibodies and t cells and so on
and it evolved to protect us once a
problematic microbe gets inside us
the bis is different
it evolved to prevent us from getting
infected in the first place
by making us hypersensitive to hygiene
hints of disease in other people
even signs that they are from another
tribe since in ancient times
encounters with different tribes could
wipe out one's own tribe with an
infectious disease they carried
often the foreign tribe had its own long
history of exposure to pathogens
some of which it still carried but to
which it had developed immunity in some
way
members of the tribe were themselves
healthy but dangerous to others
and so we developed a system whereby
anything or anyone that seems like it
might bear significant illness
can trigger an ancient brain circuit of
fear disgust and avoidance
it can also trigger rage
but rage is complex
because it's normally expressed by
getting close to the object and
attacking it
but with contagion one fears getting too
close
so generally the anger is expressed by
isolating the plague bearer
the bis is thus an alarm system specific
to contagion
and i should add to the fear of being
poisoned
which before the development of modern
chemistry often came from exposure to
living things and their dangerous
byproducts such as venoms
thus
it can also be triggered by non-animate
things like body fluids of some kinds
surfaces others may have touched
or even more abstract ideas like going
to the grocery store
during covet
there is one exception
the bis doesn't get or stay activated in
people who don't feel vulnerable
perhaps because they have good personal
protective equipment
or because youth gives them strong
innate immunity
or because they know they're already
immune
or because they're seriously misled or
delusional about the reality of the
disease
for everyone else
though
what might trigger the system is rather
plastic
but once triggered
the system is involuntary
the bis is i would argue
one of the instinctual reactions that
missed appearing in medical textbooks
perhaps because we've not had a pandemic
on this scale for a hundred years
because it focuses on potential bearers
of disease
the bis triggers many false alarms since
an infected person may at first show
only the mildest and non-specific
symptoms such as a cough or sniffle
before they become deathly ill
that's why even a small exhalation or a
surface touched by a stranger could
trigger the bis
we're at a medical test of danger we
would say the system tends to err on the
false positive side
we see it firing every day now
when someone drives alone wearing a mask
or goes for a walk by themselves in an
empty forest mast
or when someone say with good health and
no previous known adverse reactions to
vaccines
here's that a vaccine can and one in 500
000 cases cause death
but can't take any comfort that they
have a
99.999 percent chance of it not
happening because it potentially can
before advanced brain areas are turned
on and probabilities are factored in
the bis is off and running
one of the reasons our discussions of
vaccination are so emotionally
radioactive inconsistent and harsh
is that the bis is turned on in people
on both sides of the
debate those who favor vaccination are
focused on the danger of the virus and
that triggers their system
those who don't are focused on the fact
that vaccines inject into them a virus
or a virus surrogate or even a chemical
they think may be poisonous and that
turns on their system
thus
both sides are firing alarms including
many false positive alarms
that put them in a state of panic fear
loathing and disgust of the other
and now these two sides of the
vaccination debate are tearing america
apart
at many levels
families
states in the federal government it's
even affecting the country's ability to
deal with the pandemic
splitting hospital staffs and sundering
relationships between the science
scientists studying it
as of this writing in the united states
about 85 percent of people over 65
the age group most at risk are fully
vaccinated against covet
more if you include those who had one
shot
57 percent of the overall population is
fully vaccinated
but around june the rate of vaccination
slowed drastically
down to less than 1 million a day from
3.4 million daily in april
even though many more people
age 12 and up were now eligible
five million people who got the first
shot had not gone to their follow-up
appointment
states started sending vaccines back
while some vaccination sites were empty
in response u.s public health officials
appeared to believe that the number of
people who would voluntarily take the
vaccine had reached a
ceiling the change could be seen from
the top of the messaging system with
president joe biden switching from
persuasion to coercion
of the armed services federal employees
and as of september 9th of everyone
working for companies with a hundred
employees or more a category that
includes about a hundred million
americans
in a way
this should be the least likely time in
history for vaccine hesitancy
for years vaccinologists explained
vaccine skepticism
by noticing that it largely existed
because few had lived through a
large-scale pandemic
and because vaccines had already
eradicated so many serious diseases that
it gave rise to complacency about the
threat
but today's vaccine hesitancy is
happening in the midst of a pandemic in
which over 700 000 americans have died
and a recent rasmussen poll
found that a staggering one-third of
americans
quote believe officials are lying about
vaccine safety close quote
it seems to me especially vital that we
broaden our understanding of the history
and current state of vaccines
because over the summer
many who chose vaccination for
themselves
concluded that it is acceptable
to mandate vaccines for others
including those who are reluctant to get
them
that majority entered a state of
crystallization
a term i borrow from the french novelist
and doll
who applied it to the moment when a
person falls in love
feelings that may have been fluid
become solid
clear and absolute
leading to all or nothing thinking
such that even the beloved's blemishes
become signs of their perfection
crystallization as i'm using it here
happens within a group that has been
involved in a major dispute
for a while
there's an awareness that some
disagreement is in play
and people are free to have different
opinions
but at a certain point
often hard to predict and impossible to
measure because it is happening in the
wider culture and not necessarily at the
ballot box
both sides of the dispute become aware
that
within them this mass of human beings
there's now a winner
one might say
that a consensus arises that there is
now a majority consensus
suddenly
certain ideas and actions
must be applauded voiced obeyed and
acted on
while others are off limits
one person who understood how this works
intuitively was alexi de tocqueville
in democracies
as long as there is not yet a majority
opinion
a range of views can be expressed and it
appears that there is a great quote
liberty of opinion close quote to use
his phrase
but once a majority opinion forms
it acquires a sudden social power
and it brings with it pressure to end
dissent
a powerful new kind of censorship and
coercion begins in everyday life
at work school
choir church
hospitals
in all institutions
as the majority turns on the minority
demanding it comply
tocqueville like james madison
was concerned about this tyranny of the
majority which he saw as the achilles
heel of democracy
it isn't only because divisiveness
created a minority faction steeped in
lingering resentment
it's also because minorities can
sometimes be more right than majorities
indeed emerging ideas
are by definition minority ideas to
start with
the majority overtaking the minority
could mean stamping out thoughts and
actions
that would otherwise generate generate
progress and forward movement
it's a fascinating moment when this sort
of crystallization happens in a mass
culture like america's
because seemingly overnight
even the definition of legitimate speech
or thought or action also changes
tocqueville observed that quite abruptly
a person can no longer express opinions
or raise questions that only days before
were acceptable
even though no facts of the matter have
changed
at an individual level people who who
were within the bounds can be surprised
to find themselves quote
tormented by the slights and
persecutions
of daily obloquy
close quote
once this occurs he wrote quote your
fellow creatures will shun you like an
impure being
and those who are most persuaded of your
innocence will abandon you too
lest they should be shunned in their
turn close quote
in the midst of a pandemic
seeing the unvaccinated as impure is no
surprise because of course they could
carry contagion
but as tocqueville pointed out
this also occurs when there is no
contagion and we begin to experience
those who are on the wrong side as
impure
as in failing the purity test
and react to them as though they are
dangerous
that we do this
even when there is no pandemic
suggests that there is along with the
realistic fear of infection
something else going on here
a sense that those with whom we may
disagree
are impurities in the body politic
bad people
who need to be taught a lesson
even punished
a june 2021 gallup poll
found that among the vaccinated
53 percent now worry most about those
choosing not to get vaccinated
quote surpassing concerns
about lack of social distancing in their
area 27
availability of local hospital resources
and supplies 11
and availability of coronavirus tests in
their area five percent close quote
true to the behavioral immune system's
impulses
this fear is metastasizing into disgust
even hatred of those who
because they believe or act differently
are now perceived as threats
on august 26
in a front page story in the toronto
star my local newspaper a resident was
quoted as saying quote i have no empathy
left for the willfully unvaccinated let
them die
close quote
in the midst of such a death wish for
fellow human beings
even the person quoted understood
that an important mental capacity
has been lost
empathy or the ability to model other
people's minds
when we lose that on mass
the results can be tragic not least
because
getting through this
must be a group effort
as i understand it
there are two main approaches to public
health and liberal democracies and both
have been tried historically in
different places
one begins voluntarily out of respect
for civil liberties
but switches to coercion when some
voluntary ceiling deemed insufficient is
reached
ideally this intervention is based on
the principle of least necessary
coercion
the benefit to this is that it may work
to get more people vaccinated in shorter
order
but
it also conveys that the government does
not trust its citizens to make good
decisions on their own
a condescension that in turn this is
human nature 101
eventually generates resentment even
revolt
and the disengagement of significant
segments of the population
the other approach
participatory public health
sees the need for coercion as a sign
that something in the public health
outreach itself has failed
if a ceiling is reached
society's leaders should not simply
resort to force
but rather confront the flaws in their
own leadership
that they should double down on their
responsibility to generate trust in the
public
the goal of participatory public health
is not to crush
but to better engage
in that spirit what follows is an
attempt by a physician and neuroscience
writer and someone who got vaccinated
early and voluntarily
to understand those who have not made
this choice
this essay is not about cova deniers or
anti-vaxxers who oppose vaccines on
ideological grounds
nor is it about the activists or
political figures who feed off and
benefit from the corrosive discourse
around vaccines
it is instead about the vaccine hesitant
those who are concerned and anxious
about covet
but also anxious about these new
vaccines
these are the people
who are not yet vaccinated for reasons
that the majority may not understand and
which are often more anchored in history
and experience than the majority would
suspect
they are the tokvillian minority that
the majority is threatening with job
loss and other restrictions
one needn't agree with the decisions or
actions of the vaccine hesitant in order
to learn something from them and about
them and about society as a whole
they pay attention to and are vigilant
about different issues than the
vaccinated and have strong feelings
about the people and institutions
involved in our public health
particularly politicians
the drug regulatory process and
pharmaceutical companies
for many vaccine hesitancy
is not simply about the vaccines
it's about the absence of faith in the
wider systems that brought us the
vaccines
quote
public health
moves at the speed of trust close quote
notes physician and author rishi
manchanda
if we want our public health system to
function better
safer swifter
in ways that more effectively safeguard
the lives and livelihoods of all
citizens
it must be rooted not in coercion
but in confidence
and not only among the majority
chapter 2
the kernel brilliance of vaccines the
kernel idea of exposing a person to a
weakened form of a pathogen or toxin
known colloquially as like to treat like
long preceded modern medicine
and came in stages and through
observation
paracelsus who was said to have treated
persons
during a plague of 1534
noted that quote what makes a man ill
also cures him close quote
during the ancient plague of athens
430 to 425
bce the historian thucydides
noted that those who like himself got
the plague and then recovered
never got the plague again
chinese writing alluded to inoculation
in the 10th century and in the 16th
century
brahman hindus were inoculating people
with dried pus from smallpox pustules
similar practices which were common in
turkey in the 1700s
were brought to england by the
remarkable lady montague the english
ambassador's wife
but when some such as king george the
third son
died of being inoculated with a smallpox
many became reluctant to undergo the
procedure
a key advance occurred when farmers in
england in the 1700s
noticed the dairy mates who milk cows
got cow pox on their hands from the
udders
cowpox was a very mild illness compared
to smallpox which had a 30 mortality
rate by some estimates
it was observed that the maids with
cowpox were immune to the dreaded
smallpox
an english cattle breeder named benjamin
jeste who had himself contracted cowpox
and was thus immune to smallpox decided
supposedly on the spur of the moment
to intentionally inoculate his wife and
children with cowpox
they remained immune to smallpox 15
years later
the english physician edward jenner
learning of this
began systematically exposing patients
to cowpox including an eight-year-old
boy named james phipps
he exposed james to cowpox and then
exposed him to smallpox to see if he'd
contract it
an experiment conducted quite obviously
without informed consent
the boy survived and was vaccinated 20
times without bad effect said jenner who
reported on the benefits of the
procedure in warding off smallpox in a
series of cases
he was initially ridiculed for this idea
but in the end prevailed
the phenomenon was soon called
vaccination
from wakinia the latin for cowpox virus
species
waka being cow
some have even wondered whether the
ancient western symbol for the medical
arts and healing
still used today
the rod of asclepius a serpent wrapped
around his staff
may itself be an allusion to the colonel
idea that something dangerous can also
protect
according to the greek myth the sclepius
was said to have healed people with
snake venom
which
can have some medicinal properties that
were written about by nikander
and interestingly
the same image appears in the torah in
numbers 21 8
and the lord said unto moses make thee a
fiery serpent and set it upon a pole
and it shall come to pass that every one
that is bitten when he looketh upon it
shall live
and moses made a serpent of brass and
put it upon a pole and it came to pass
that if a serpent had bitten any man
when he beheld the serpent of brass he
lived
all of which is to say
that the heel harm paradox is a deep
archetype in the human psyche
and it came not from big pharma
but from everyday often rural
observations
one might even call them front line
observations about how nature works and
how the immune system behaves
among the great triumphs of vaccination
are the elimination in the united states
of the scourge of polio and the
eradication of smallpox throughout the
world
indeed
perhaps because of these successes
many of us nostalgically imagine that
their development in public acceptance
came easily
but the real history shows a more
textured picture
a number of polio vaccines had to be
tried
the initial vaccine studies had very
little oversight and the first vaccines
left some children paralyzed
the first truly effective vaccine the
salk had problems too
in 1955 a bad batch of over 120 000
doses from the cutter pharmaceutical
company contained the live poliovirus
causing 40 000 cases of polio and
killing 10.
the qatar incident as the event is now
known revealed the vulnerability of the
systems that produce vaccines
and remains one of the sources of the
nightmare that so haunts the hesitant
getting the dreaded disease from the
treatment
the incident was followed by efforts to
improve the regulatory systems so that
similar tragedies wouldn't be repeated
in the public's mind perhaps the
greatest triumph of vaccination was the
mid-century worldwide eradication of
smallpox
a horrifying scourge that was lethal in
30 of cases
the history as it is often told
attributes the victory solely to
vaccines
but as british physician richard
halverson has written
it was not simply the product of a
single blockbuster vaccine or campaign
as it is so often described
but rather a regime of multiple public
health measures
instituted alongside vaccination
the details here are quite interesting
beginning in the 17th and 18th centuries
there were a number of mass campaigns of
inoculation with smallpox and then
vaccination with cowpox that led to a
decline in smallpox in the 19th century
by 1948
some physicians in england thought the
illness was sufficiently well managed
that mass vaccination of infants which
carried some risks could wind down
and so
mass vaccination was replaced by a new
more individually focused strategy
if a case was reported public health
officials isolated the person and their
contacts
and the contacts were vaccinated
this was called the surveillance
containment strategy it worked
after the cessation of vaccination
in england a few cases occurred in 1973
and 1978
but both were based on laboratory
accidents
according to halverson the world health
organization came to the same conclusion
and also adopted the surveillance
containment approach elsewhere
in 1980 the disease was declared
eradicated
but alongside the public health system's
triumphant eradication of polio and
smallpox
from the 1940s through the 1970s there
was a horrifying chapter as well
one that included staggering abuses by
public health and medical authorities
the tuskegee experiment
conducted by the u.s public health
service from 1932 until 1972
sent out representatives to find
african-american men with syphilis
who were told they would receive
treatment for their quote bad blood
close quote
no treatment occurred
the officials gave these men a placebo
instead of penicillin
which would have saved them
this was done so the investigators by
watching the men die slowly could study
the natural course of the devastating
disease
during the same period of time
the u.s public health system oversaw
70 000 sterilizations of quote mentally
deficient close quote people
with learning problems the blind and the
poor
and also forcibly remove the uteruses of
african-american and indigenous women
all as part of an international eugenics
movement that swept through public
health
psychedelics and other drugs were given
to people in mental institutions without
telling them
often leading to nightmare trips
and dangerous campaigns were undertaken
based on only partial knowledge
such as the widespread radiation
of healthy children's thymus glands
a key part of one's immune system
which later caused cancers
all of these programs
used abstract population-based thinking
dehumanizing people
into numbers to be toyed with
in the name of science
and progress
none of the public health abuses during
this period involved informed patient
consent
and yet they were government-sponsored
loaded and justified
in the name of the greater good
it took the revelation
of nazi medical experiments on jews and
others to give rise to a new ethics of
consent for research subjects
the nuremberg code of ethics of 1947
along with the 1964 declaration of
helsinki
originally developed by the world
medical association
required physicians and scientists to
obtain the informed consent of all
research subjects
this breakthrough
led to the normalization of patient
consent not just for research subjects
but for those undergoing all medical
procedures
and became a bedrock
of what many of us in the medical field
now see as an inviable code of ethics
but in the late 1970s and 1980s there
were new controversies
in 1976 a swine flu outbreak occurred in
fort dix new jersey
fearing that the country was on the cusp
of a pandemic the u.s government
approved a vaccine and undertook an
aggressive rollout that involved 48
million people
but there were two unforeseen
developments
first the epidemic receded on its own
and rather quickly
second
450 vaccinated people came down with a
neurological disorder called guianbare
syndrome
in greater numbers than would be
expected during that period
after producing and distributing the
vaccine so quickly the government then
reacted with caution
but the idea that a vaccine could cause
damage
stuck in the public's mind quote
this government-led campaign was widely
viewed as a debacle
and put an irreparable dent in future
public health initiatives close quote
wrote rebecca creston in discover
quote as well as negatively influenced
the public's perception
of both the flu and the flu shot in this
country
close quote
that skepticism
might have emerged so sharply because
the swine flu debacle occurred against
the backdrop of another contemporaneous
event
in the 1970s
a number of parents began arguing that
their children were left with serious
brain problems
and seizures
after receiving the diphtheria pertussis
vaccine
numerous vaccine-related lawsuits
followed and the parents scored many
legal victories costing pharmaceutical
companies millions of dollars
it cost 12 cents to make a dose of the
dpt vaccine in 1982.
but within a few years the cost
increased 35-fold thanks to litigation
awards
and as a result companies started
leaving the vaccine business
to this day there's disagreement about
the primary cause of the brain problems
with some of the parents insisting it
was the vaccine and vaccine advocates
arguing that these children actually had
a genetic condition called rivets
syndrome
possibly brought to the surface by the
vaccination
but which they would have suffered from
anyway
there is little disagreement though
about what happened next
in 1986
the last pharmaceutical company still
making the dpt literal
told the government it would stop making
the vaccine
companies making vaccines for other
diseases were also being sued and also
stopped production
the government grew very concerned and
in 1986 congress passed the national
childhood vaccine injury act
ncvia
the act established a new system for
vaccine-related injuries or death linked
to childhood vaccinations
wherein companies were indemnified from
being sued for safety problems
soon after the program was enlarged to
include adult vaccination injuries
if anyone believed that a child or
person was injured by a vaccine they
could take the complaint to a newly
established vaccine court run by the u.s
government and plead their case
if they won the government would pay
them damages from a fund it created out
of taxpayer money
this might have seemed the best possible
solution
the country retained a vaccine supply
and citizens had recourse in the event
of harm
but because companies were indemnified
from any harm their vaccines might cause
they no longer had a powerful financial
incentive to rectify existing safety
problems or even improve safety as time
passed
arguably
they were financially disincentivized
from doing so
the solution shifted liability for the
cost of safety problems from the makers
onto the taxpayers
the pool that included those who were
arguably harmed
this atmosphere of suspicion spread in
the 1990s with even greater
explosiveness and toxicity
during the vaccine autism debate
the landscape of the vaccine discourse
in the united states
never simple or one-dimensional to begin
with
was becoming even more complicated and
hostile
to understand the polarized
psychological reactions to vaccination
now
as well as what to do about it it's
essential to disentangle three things
first
there is the kernel idea behind
vaccination as a treatment
arguably one of humanity's greatest
medical insights
second
there's the process by which a
particular vaccine is produced
tested for safety and efficacy and
regulated
that is the execution of the core
insight which as we know can vary in
success from one vaccine to the next or
fail completely
we've not yet been able to make an aids
vaccine for instance
third
there is the way in which those who
produce the vaccine and the public
health officials in charge of regulating
and disseminate it communicate to the
public
only a person who rejects the first
kernel idea could sensibly be called an
anti-vaxxer
many people accept the kernel insight
and have been vaccinated multiple times
in the past
but have come to doubt the execution or
necessity of a particular vaccine
and hence also come to doubt the claims
made in the course of disseminating it
they become hesitant about that
particular vaccine and defer or avoid
getting it
one reason hesitancy can take hold in
relatively low trust societies is that
reluctant vaccinees typically have no
direct relationship with those mandating
vaccinations and thus no personal
evidence that those people are
trustworthy
for a regular medication a physician
needs and has the ability to convince
one patient at a time to take a
particular drug
this is why pharmaceutical companies
have huge marketing budgets to sway
individual physicians and patients
alike in the case of vaccines
companies need to convince only a few
key officials in committees
who then buy their product and market it
for them to an entire population
for companies producing vaccines
mass marketing is replaced almost
entirely by political lobbying
a number of events occurred in the 1990s
that suggested growing enmeshment
between the pharmaceutical industry and
scientists involved in drug production
and approval decisions
along with the role of profit in the
whole arrangement
was becoming an endemic problem
in 2005 the associated press reported
that quote
two of the us government's premier
infectious disease researchers are
collecting royalties on an aids
treatment they're testing on patients
using taxpayer money but patients
weren't told on their consent forms
about the financial connection close
quote
one of them
was helping to develop an interleukin-2
treatment tested around the globe
the problem
as those reports noted
was that quote hundreds perhaps
thousands
of patients in nih experiments
made decisions to participate in
experiments that often carry risks
without full knowledge about the
researchers financial interests
close quote
one of the two people running these
experiments was a researcher named dr
anthony fauci who first rose to
prominence a decade before in the aids
crisis
not only was the assertion about
royalties true
it was also perfectly
legal royalties for public service
scientists were first allowed under the
bi-dole act of 1980 which had attempted
to remedy two related problems
the lack of reimbursement for
government-funded research
and retaining top scientists who were
being lured away from public work by the
private sector
this act and other federal regulations
permitted the nih for instance to
collect proceeds
if its research made money in the
private sector and allowed individual
government scientists to collect up to
150 000 a year
in royalties on treatments they
developed
at the time
fauci said he tried to alert patients to
his royalties but his agency rebuffed
him arguing that he couldn't do so under
the law
the non-disclosure of the researchers
interest was changed after the scandal
but the damage had been done
in the minds of some elements of the
public there was something fishy going
on between the government and the
pharmaceutical industry and it had
something to do with money and a
willingness to disregard or dilute
informed consent
these suspicions heightened in the 2000s
as key physicians began revealing to the
public that big pharma had been involved
in a number of major abuses of its
relationships with government patients
physicians and journals
one of the first to break this story was
marcia engel
who had been editor of the new england
journal of medicine arguably the most
important medical journal in the united
states at the time
in her 2004 book
the truth about drug companies how they
deceive us and what to do about it she
argued that the company spent far more
on marketing administration public
relations and rebranding than they did
on research
and that they actually discovered very
few new effective drugs
instead they used quote lures
bribes and kickbacks close quote
to get drugs taken up by physicians
angles showed
how these companies penetrated medical
schools conventions and organizations
often passing off marketing as quote
education close quote
which they provided free of charge
more to the point angle argued that
government agencies were highly
compromised
she demonstrated how conflicts of
interest permeated the u.s food and drug
administration
which gave expedited reviews and
approvals for drugs with major side
effects like heart attacks and stroke
such as vioxx and celebrex
and some with no serious benefit
engel also revealed that quote many
members of the fda advisory committees
were paid consultants for drug companies
although they were supposed to excuse
themselves
from decisions when they have a
financial connection with the company
that makes the drug in question
that rule is regularly waived close
quote
she documented multiple instances of
committee members discussing decisions
on safety violations committed by the
very companies that paid them
from which they did not recuse
themselves
engel's book which was published to
great acclaim was impossible to dismiss
as fringe
quote
dr engel's case is tough persuasive and
troubling close quote claimed the new
york times
publisher week publishers weekly wrote
quote in what should serve as the fast
food nation of the drug industry angle
presents a searing indictment of big
pharma as corrupt and corrupting close
quote
over the next few years
the kinds of abuses she documented
made it to the courts as these trials
became public americans who suffered
from serious side effects caused by the
drugs involved took notice
in 2012 physician ben goldacre of oxford
university published bad pharma
in which he explored fraud settlements
for pharmaceutical companies covering up
known adverse events
including lethal ones
and hiding information including about
safety
book's subtitle how drug companies
mislead doctors and harm patients was
key
physicians
often didn't know the world was being
pulled over their eyes or what had been
kept from them
but when the practices of large
pharmaceutical companies were examined
in the courts with internal documents
reviewed
one illegal activity after another was
revealed
gold acres list makes one shudder
quote
pfizer was fined 2.3 billion for
promoting the painkiller beckstra later
taken off the market over safety
concerns at dangerously high doses
misbranding it with
the intent to defraud or mislead in
quotes
the largest criminal fine ever imposed
in the u.s until it was beaten by gsk
clax
so smith klein
and a quote
quote in july 2012 gsk received a three
billion dollar fine for civil and
criminal fraud
after pleading guilty to a vast range of
charges around unlawful promotion of
prescription drugs
and failure to report safety data close
quote
quote abbott was fined 1.5 billion in
may 2012 over the illegal promotion of
depakote close quote
quote eli lilly was fined 1.4 billion in
2009 close quote
quote astrazeneca was fined 520 million
in 2010 close quote
quote merck was fined 1 billion in 2011
close quote
after goldacre's book was published the
fines kept coming
johnson johnson was made to pay 2.2
billion in 2013 which including which
included according to the justice
department quote criminal fines close
quote for having quote jeopardized the
health and safety of patients and
damaged the public trust close quote
in 2019 the company was fined another
572 million for its role in the opioid
epidemic and then find a whopping 8
billion by a jury in a different case
an amount that will no doubt be reduced
but which signals public outrage at the
violations
these huge fines
year after year
involve popular drugs taken by tens of
millions of patients with negative
effects including death
stories of devastation have become lore
in many families and communities
the circle of concern
is even wider if you if you include
those who may not have been personally
affected but are aware of this
problematic legal history
when you personally take a medication
you tend to notice news about it
especially bad news
whether or not you've experienced any
negative effects yourself
you are naturally alert to their
existence
each time a big pharma company is in the
courts and in the media because of some
problem the seeds of skepticism are
planted in the minds of many americans
and not just skepticism of the company
themselves
the transgressions
mentioned above
were only possible on such a scale
because of a textbook case of regulatory
capture
consisting of a mixture of perverse
incentives and priorities
a tolerance for non-transparency
and in some cases a culture of collusion
the fda bills big pharma 800 million
dollars a year
which in turn helps pay fda salaries
regulators also often get jobs in the
pharmaceutical industry shortly after
leaving the fda or similar bodies
there is a huge incentive to impress and
certainly not to cross
a potential future employer
it's useful to see how this works by
examining a case that became famous as a
tale of epic greed and corruption
and which patients and physicians were
misled and deceived
only after patients families activists
and even whole communities yelled
themselves hoarse about it for years
in 1995 the fda approved oxycontin for
short-term serious pain like terminal
cancer or post-operative pain
this approval was based on legitimate
scientific studies related to these
narrow experiences
the fda then made it available for minor
pains with around-the-clock daily usage
in 2001.
that approval
for long-term use was not based on any
studies
according to a 60 minutes report in 2019
quote
equally suspicious but legal
was the large number of key fda
regulators who went through the
revolving door to jobs with drug
manufacturers close quote
the opioid epidemic has to date left
half a million americans dead
this same compromised regulatory system
allows big pharma to pay for and play a
key role in performing
the very studies that lead to the
authorization of its own products
for decades it was not just common for
authors of studies to receive payments
from the very companies making the
medicines being tested
it was also systematically hidden
drug companies secretly ghost wrote
studies of their own drugs
goldacre shows how they conscripted
academics to pretend they had authored
them
the papers were then submitted to
mainstream journals whose impressure
would give the study's credibility
allowing these drugs to become quote the
standard of practice
16 of the 20 papers reporting on the
clinical trials conducted on vioxx the
anti-inflammatory and pain medication
that got fda approval in 1999 then was
taken off the market in 2004 for causing
heart attacks and strokes
were ghost written by merck employees
then signed by respected scientists
merck ultimately agreed to pay out 4.9
billion in vioxx lawsuits
the academics who lent their names to
the studies could then stuff their cvs
with these articles receive promotions
and hire salaries within academia
and ultimately ultimately get more
consulting fees from pharmaceutical
companies
at which point they are seen as quote
experts by a trusting public
in the current regulatory environment
companies run the studies of their own
products
a danish study found that 75 of drug
company self-studies assessed were ghost
written
a leading u.s editor of a specialist
journal estimated that 33 percent of
articles submitted to his journal were
ghostwritten by drug companies
these imposters don't get adequately
investigated by congress because the
pharmaceutical and health industries are
now the highest paying lobby in the
country
having doled out at least 4.5 billion in
the last two decades to politicians
of both parties
quote
pfizer's pack has been the most active
close quote stat reporter lev feyture
writes quote sending 548 checks to
various lawmakers and other industry
groups
more checks than the actual number of
elected officials in the house and
senate close quote
while gold acres book shows the many
ways that drug studies have been rigged
to deliver certain outcomes
one doesn't always have to rig a study
to get the same result
among the most common techniques is to
delay the reporting of medication side
effects until after the patent runs out
and then use the bad publicity to sell a
new replacement medication which is
still on
patent polls repeatedly show that the
chief concern among the vaccine hesitant
is about side effects
or at least effects that don't show up
right away
the latest edition of the standard
textbook in the field plotkins vaccine
has an excellent chapter on vaccine
safety which notes quote
because reactions that are rare delayed
or which occur in only certain
subpopulations may not be detected
before vaccines are licensed
post-licensure evaluation of vaccine
safety is critical close quote
post-licensure first requires fda
approval so for most vaccines that means
more follow-up after the typical
two-year approval process at least
several years of it
in 2018 the new york times pro-vaccine
science writer melinda wenner moyer
noted with shock
that she learned it was not uncommon
among vaccine researchers
to take the attitude that censoring bad
news about their research was necessary
and that some who didn't were ostracized
by their peers
quote as a science journalist
i've written several articles to quell
vaccine angst and encourage immunization
but lately
i've noticed that the cloud of fear
surrounding vaccines is having another
nefarious effect
it is eroding the integrity of vaccine
science
in february i was awarded a fellowship
by the non-partisan alicia patterson
foundation to report on vaccines
soon after
i found myself hitting a wall
when i tried to report on unexpected or
controversial aspects of vaccine
efficacy or safety
scientists often didn't want to talk
with me
when i did get them on the phone a
worrying theme emerged
scientists are so terrified of the
public's vaccine hesitancy that they are
censoring themselves
playing down undesirable findings and
perhaps even avoiding undertaking
studies that could show unwanted effects
those who break these unwritten rules
are criticized close quote
moyer went on to quote authorities who
argue that smaller studies and even
inconclusive ones
often give us the first glimpse of an
insight or problem
and this is to say nothing of the wider
issue if scientists play down their
undesirable findings in potentially
mandated medicines
as moyer found them to be doing
they are not just missing opportunities
for good science
they are potentially generating
anti-scientific misinformation
quote
vaccine scientists will earn a lot more
public trust and overcome a lot more
unfounded fear if they choose
transparency over censorship close quote
she wrote
by the time moyer published her article
in 2018
many americans were already long in the
habit of questioning certain elements of
their public health
in part because of this hornet's nest of
corruption and regulatory capture
but this habit could also be explained
in part by the general trend in medicine
over the past two decades towards
recognizing the superiority of
individually tailored interventions or
personalized medicine
which acknowledges the different people
have different risk factors genetics
medical histories and reactions to
medical products
it is now commonplace for people to take
responsibility for their own health
because this is precisely what we have
been telling them to do
encouraging them to get to know their
own unique risk factors for disease
based on their own individual histories
and genetics
vaccines in contrast are a
one-size-fits-all intervention
administered on mass
by those who know nothing specific about
the vaccinees or their children
and when political and medical
authorities change policies from day to
day
and public health recommendations in one
jurisdiction or country differ from
those in others
questions will be asked
the public has been assured that we in
healthcare
recognize that the era of medical
authoritarianism and the ugly practices
that led us to require informed consent
are behind us
this means
that whenever there is a treatment on
hand
the burden of proof to demonstrate that
it is safe
and effective
must fall on those who offer it
it means we must never stifle questions
or shame people
for being anxious
i am a psychiatrist and a psychoanalyst
and i deal with people's anxieties and
their paranoia too
many people think the anxious are
necessarily weak
one medical colleague calls the vaccine
hesitant wimps
but this is if not entirely wrong
a superficial way of understanding
anxiety
anxiety is a signal
it evolved to get us to pay attention to
something
sometimes an external threat and
sometimes an internal one
such as an ignored feeling or forbidden
thought threatening to emerge from
within
anxiety can be neurotic
it can even be psychotic
it can also save your life because
dangers do exist
when people don't experience enough
anxiety
we say they're in denial
thus in some situations the capacity to
feel anxiety can be an advantage which
is likely why it's preserved in
evolution in so many animals
aristotle understood this very point
long ago
as he noted the courageous person say a
soldier
can and should feel anxious he is facing
danger after all and his wisdom tells
him there is risk
what distinguishes the courageous person
from the coward is not that they don't
worry or fear but they can still manage
to move forward into the dangerous
situation they cannot avoid facing
all of which is to say that the presence
of anxiety alone is not dispositive of
sanity or insanity
it alone does not tell you whether the
anxiety is well or ill-founded
the same goes with distrust
sometimes distrust is paranoia
and sometimes it's healthy skepticism
as of a september 2019 gallup poll only
a few months before the covet 19
pandemic
big pharma was the least trusted of
america's top 25 industry sectors
number 25 of 25.
in the eyes of ordinary americans
it had both the highest negatives and
the lowest positives of all industries
at number 24 was the federal government
and at number 23 was the health care
industry
these three industries
form a neat troika
though at number 22 was the advertising
and public relations industry which
facilitates the work of the other three
those inside the troika often
characterize the vaccine hesitant as
broadly fringe and paranoid
but there are plenty of industries and
sectors that americans do trust
of the top 25 industry sectors 21 enjoy
net positive views from american voters
only pharma government health care and
pr
are seen as net negative
precisely the sectors involved in the
rollout of the covet vaccines
this set the conditions in a way
for a perfect storm
chapter 3
a new plague descends in february and
march 2020
it became clear that the disaster that
had swept through wuhan was becoming
catastrophic in bergamo
as frontline healthcare workers were
dying in both china and italy
the virus had also spread throughout
western europe and arrived in north
america
early reports of the case fatality rate
reached over 14.5 percent in italy in
the spring
and in spain sweden and other hot spots
it was over 11 percent
devouring the elderly in every affected
country
ppe often didn't exist for frontline
healthcare workers
bodies were stored in refrigerated
trucks
citizens were told mass would not
protect them
and there were no known outpatient
treatments
while hospitals could provide oxygen
this was often insufficient and so
victims were put on ventilators which
may
have made some cases worse and was a
horrible way to die
while much of the united states was
terrified
there was some light
dr anthony fauci
the physician scientist now running the
country's pandemic defense
seemed able to answer most press
questions
projected an affable ivuncular persona
and spoken ways people could understand
which is what the nation required
even skeptics had hopes
fauci seemed steady when events took
unexpected turns
explaining that we were learning as we
went along
he said the lockdown would be for 15
days to flatten the curve
when that didn't work he explained why
argued that it should be extended
and much of the nation went along
in the united states exhausted by its
hyper-polarized political scene here was
someone who had worked with both parties
advising every president since ronald
reagan
for those on the right he could be seen
as an employee of and messenger for
president donald trump
for those on the left he was a long-time
public servant who had headed the same
institution the national institute of
allergy and infectious disease
niaid
since 1984
and played vital roles in the fights
against aids and ebola
there was a widespread sense that fauci
was the right man at the right time
but then there were flip-flops on masks
after claiming the science showed the
mass were unnecessary
felchi later said they were absolutely
necessary
but wouldn't be for the vaccinated until
eventually
they were
there were also disputes about lockdowns
initially introduced as temporary to
flatten the curve
they were later extended to become a new
way of life
in order to save lives
but then some states like florida which
didn't impose long and severe lockdowns
had lower age-adjusted mortality than
states like new york which did
then another issue emerged that was not
simply scientific
but also political
since the earliest days of the pandemic
many regular people struggled to make
sense of its origins
the chinese communist party had claimed
the virus emerged from a wet market
while denying any connection to virology
labs located nearby
there was obviously a cover-up unfolding
in china with arrests of citizen
journalists and detentions and
disappearances
of wuhan physicians who witnessed the
first cases
and who would have had ideas about where
it started
various observers argued that there was
reason to consider that covet may have
leaked from the wuhan institute of
virology
and perhaps even may have been
engineered by gain of function gof
research
in which a natural virus is made more
contagious and lethal ostensibly to see
if the scientists can get ahead of
nature
and to study it how it operates in order
to make new vaccines or medications
or for biological warfare
gof is so controversial that in 2014
president barack obama put a moratorium
on it
in 2017
doctors fauci and francis collins
then director of the nih who had opposed
the moratorium
succeeded in having it lifted
but fauci asserted that the scientists
who were in a position to judge the
covet situation
concluded its origin was natural
the media followed suit
and called those who thought otherwise
conspiracy theorists
the new york times the washington post
and others called the possibility of a
lab leak a conspiracy theory that had
been debunked
in the meantime
a master narrative began to emerge
once upon a time
life was relatively normal and safe
and then the pandemic came
and life as we knew it suddenly changed
in awful ways
the only way out
the only path back to a world without
covid would be to make a vaccine
as quickly as possible
until then
everyone would have to do their part to
stop the spread
which meant that basic social functions
would have to cease
including school for millions of
children
thousands of small businesses would have
to close
and civil liberties rolled back
it would be a difficult time
but eventually we would have the vaccine
and covert would be over
as long as everyone got it
of course
but then who wouldn't want to
on this point bill gates of gavi the
vaccine alliance and the largest private
contributor to the who was very direct
quote
the ultimate solution
the only thing that really lets us go
back completely to normal and feel good
is to create a vaccine close quote he
said
if you asked researchers or most
physicians in the spring of 2020
how long it normally takes to produce a
vaccine safe enough to administer to
patients
many would have pointed out that the
average fast vaccine takes seven to ten
years
and that the first vaccine might just be
one of several required to end a given
crisis because often the first is not
the best
this seemed too long
gates predicted that there would be
problems moving quickly because
companies would have to produce a
one-size-fits-all vaccine that could
have different effects on different
groups including pregnant women the
undernourished and people with existing
comorbidities quote
people like myself and fauci
gates said
are saying 18 months to make the vaccine
if everything went perfectly there will
be a trade-off
we'll have less safety testing than we
typically would have we just don't have
the time to do what we normally do close
quote
the solution he noted was that quote
governments will have to be involved
because there will be some risk and
indemnification needed close quote
in august
that solution was reached
as the intercept reported on august 28th
quote an amendment to the prep act
stipulates that companies quote cannot
be sued for money damages in court close
quote
over injuries caused by medical
countermeasures for covet
such counter measures include vaccines
therapeutics and respiratory devices
close quote
the only exception to this immunity
would be if death or serious physical
injury is caused by willfully willful
misconduct
indemnification for vaccines was as
discussed above not unique
what was new was that the companies
producing them were indemnified before
the vaccine was even made and fully
assassed
knowing it would all be done
faster than ever before
as the nation agonized over mounting
deaths the race for a vaccine was moving
quickly if too opaquely for some
in september 2020
a number of scientists began openly
worrying about the non-transparency of
the vaccine trials
and whether this could wind up affecting
vaccine hesitancy
the new york times ran several articles
on this reporting that astrazeneca
pfizer and moderna had each withheld
their study protocols from outside
scientists and the public
withholding protocols
guarantees that outside researchers
can't know how participants are selected
or monitored and how effectiveness or
safety are defined
so that they can't really know
what exactly is being studied
pharma companies have traditionally
argued
that not only the trial patients but the
clinical trial data belong to them that
it's proprietary
even though the study's results impact
millions
this is part of a kind of traditional
secrecy in the field
delaying protocol release conveniently
means that it is a company's press
releases
not the verified science that dominate
the public's all-important initial
impression of its product
that the government regulatory agencies
go along with all this
it is in fact standard practice
doesn't assuage the public for many it
makes the whole process appear corrupt
and it doesn't help that according to
the conflict of interest disclosures of
the authors of the pfizer and moderna
vaccine clinical trials
some of the authors are employed by
these companies and often have stock
options
the essence of the scientific method is
conducting experiments that everyone can
objectively see and verify
transparency is the bedrock of
experimental science and the means to
ultimately dispel doubt
moreover
in terms of the scale of public
involvement
the experience of the summer and fall of
2020 was unlike any other in the history
of medicine
never before had studies of this size
and consequence been run so quickly or a
medicine been produced so quickly to be
given to hundreds of millions of people
these studies were called phase 3
clinical trials and if they had positive
results then the vaccine could be given
to hundreds of millions of people on the
basis of an fda emergency use
authorization
but how long were the patients followed
in these two studies after their second
dose to assess safety and efficacy
two months
on that basis
the vaccines were given to over a
hundred million people
one must not confuse the perhaps
immaterial fact that the vaccines were
made quickly
from the arguably more important fact
that they were tested on people for only
a short time
these vaccines were developed so quickly
in part
because the new mrna technology allows
quicker production
and because parts of the production
lines that in the past were staged out
over time
were in this case set up simultaneously
with the help of huge cash infusions
all else being equal
there's a serious argument that it might
be hugely advantageous to be able to
produce new vaccines so quickly quote if
you can intervene with let's say a forty
percent effective vaccine four months
before you can intervene with an eighty
percent effective vaccine
you save more lives with the forty
percent effective vaccine that's
delivered four months earlier close
quote barney graham of the national
institutes of health pointed out
quote being fast in an outbreak setting
in some ways is more important than
being perfect close quote
still it was obvious as early as the
fall
that some testing steps would be skipped
quote we'll have less safety testing
than we typically would have close quote
gates noted
quote we just don't have the time
close quote
must that be a problem
why especially during a pandemic
wouldn't we want to quickly distribute
any vaccine that appears to work even
somewhat effectively
to those who are willing to take on any
potential risks that may go with less
safety testing
some people
might even decide for themselves that a
raging pandemic is a dangerous enough
threat to outweigh every other possible
concern
but what we shouldn't do
if we want to maintain public trust and
cohesion is act as though there is no
chance that any legitimate concern could
ever possibly emerge
or that we know more than we really do
after only two months of study
with complex biological systems
we simply can't presume that just
because we have a fantastic idea for a
treatment
the safety we hope for
and see at the start
will necessarily hold over time
take the classic example of thalidomide
it was originally a sedative used for
anxiety and later tried for nausea
it worked leading some to theorize that
it could prevent nausea in pregnant
mothers
in practice
once on the market it did
but it also caused serious birth defects
in children it took longer than nine
months
and enough cases to realize that these
side effects came from the drug
and even more time to overcome the drug
companies opposition to the facts
the same applies to any of the major
drugs pulled off the market for causing
cancer heart attacks and diabetes
they don't always cause dire
consequences immediately
or in everyone
sometimes these drugs set a process in
motion immediately but it takes
scientists a year or many years to pick
up the trend in a population at large
working from first scientific principles
and based on what we already know
we can often develop a neat theory about
what might work
but because we don't know what we don't
know
it often doesn't turn out as we expect
that is why empirical science developed
as a way to test our theories
empirical science is always by
definition
science after the fact
this is especially important given the
specific kind of vaccine that was being
approved in the united states the mrna
vaccine which was a first of its kind
instead of exposing a person to the
virus itself in attenuated live form
like the mmr
or killed form
like the polio shot or flu shot
which is how many of the other vaccines
we've come to know work
in the mrna vaccine a person is exposed
to an artificially made genetic
messenger
mrna
that goes into their cells and directs
them to make part of the virus which
then triggers antibodies
early on in the rollout
both the pharma pr industry and the
press
emphasized how novel these vaccines were
and how this unique technique would
produce a vaccine so quickly
but when some side effects started to
emerge
and people got nervous
officials and the company's own pr teams
changed their message
these techniques were now presented as
not new at all but as having been around
a long time
the hesitant notice flip-flops in
communication like this
at best it makes them wonder about the
lasting veracity of public health
messages at worst
it makes them deeply suspicious
over the course of the summer of 2020
while the clinical trials were ongoing
outside scientists still had no access
to what exactly was being measured and
hence studied
so there was no external check-on or
observation of the process
despite much of the research having been
funded by government
marketing and distribution would be done
by the government
the government would be providing the
customers and the government would even
pay for the consequences of safety
problems that might arise
withholding protocols rather than
disseminating them as widely as possible
was
under such circumstances
a sign of outlandish
and the governmental agencies that are
supposed to advocate for the public in
this case the fda cdc and nih
countenanced it
in september 2020
one bit of secrecy was lifted
it turned out that astrazeneca had
stopped its clinical trial twice
the first pause was not even announced
the second one was
but neither the uk public nor the fda
nor scientists were immediately told why
before they ever found out however
astrazeneca ceo pasqual soriat did
privately disclose the reason
two cases of serious neurological damage
to the j.p morgan investment bank
to some
this said much about who exactly this
process was designed to benefit
quote the communication has been
horrible and unacceptable close quote
vaccine advocate virologist peter hotez
said
quote
this is not how the american people
should be hearing about this close quote
scientists started to demand to see the
protocols
hotes and others quote criticized obtuse
statements released by government
officials
including uk regulators
who he said failed to supply a rationale
for resuming their trials close quote
government officials and the regulators
who most citizens assume are there to
keep the process honest
seemed instead to be partners in the
obfuscation
in november 2020
the exciting news arrived
we had vaccine liftoff
phase 3 trials of the pfizer and moderna
vaccines were said to be 95
and 94.5 percent efficacious
as fouchy and the company press releases
announced
and the emergency use authorization was
granted on the basis of these two-month
studies
allowing distribution of the vaccines to
millions
efficacious
is the term used to describe how
effective a treatment is in the
artificial situation of a clinical trial
with volunteer patients
a group not always representative of the
wider population
effective
is the term used to describe how a
treatment works in the real world
the media quickly assumed the two were
the same
to them hearing that a vaccine was 95
efficacious
meant it was practically perfect
which the press repeated over and over
but what exactly were the vaccines
efficacious at doing
stopping viral transmission
preventing severe illness or reducing
hospitalization
or icu admissions
preventing death
efficacious for how long
and efficacious in whom
in the elderly who were most vulnerable
to death
without clear definitions and answers to
these questions
typical of much of the coverage
americans only had a limited idea really
of what these vaccines had been shown to
do in the narrow universe of clinical
trials
let alone what they do when given to the
public
in fact they didn't receive answers to a
single one of these questions
moreover
there was still a cloud of mystery
surrounding the trials
after pressure mounted in the wake of
the astrazeneca revelation in september
the four major western vaccine
manufacturers finally released their
protocols each over a hundred pages long
after the protocols were released peter
doshi
an associate editor at the british
medical journal who does research into
drug approval processes and how results
are communicated to the public try to
sound an alarm quote
none of the trials currently underway
are designed to detect a reduction in
any serious outcome such as hospital
admissions use of intensive care or
deaths close quote he said
only one of the studies of the oxford
astrozenica looked at whether vaccinated
individuals were less likely to transmit
virus by doing weekly pcr swabbing
vaccinated people had lower viral loads
were less likely to have a positive
covet test
and were positive for shorter durations
very good news indeed
though not automatically applicable to
the other mrna vaccine studies
so
what were these clinical trial studies
that showed 95 and 94.5 efficacy looking
at
if not saving lives and viral
transmission
consider that researchers can set up a
study to examine whether a vaccine
prevents a person from experiencing any
or all of the following events sometimes
called endpoints
an asymptomatic infection
the patient is carrying the virus
but the case is so mild that they don't
know it even though it is shown to be
present by a positive virus test
a clinically symptomatic infection that
is mild and might be confused with a
common cold
a clinically symptomatic infection that
is moderate
requires hospital admission
a clinically symptomatic severe
infection requiring icu admission and
even a ventilator
a clinically symptomatic severe
infection that ends in death
what were the events or the end points
that the phase three moderna and pfizer
studies claimed to be examining
they said they looked at any clinically
significant infection quote of
essentially any severity
as the primary endpoint
but therein lies the rub
as doshi explained
quote severe illness requiring hospital
admission
which happens in only a small fraction
of symptomatic covet 19 cases
would be unlikely to occur in
significant numbers and trials
because most people with symptomatic
covit 19 experience only mild symptoms
even trials involving 30 000 or more
patients would turn up relatively few
cases of severe disease
close quote
how few serious cases in terms of deaths
were there
in the pfizer trial
not a single person died of covet 19
in either the vaccine or the placebo
group
the report that moderna gave to the fda
on december 17 2020
on its trial
specifically said it considered death
quote a secondary endpoint close quote
and added
that quote there were no deaths due to
covet 19 at the time of the interim
analysis to enable an assessment of
vaccine efficacy against death due to
covet 19 close quote
by publication date
one person had died in the placebo group
go over that again
in the study period
for the two new mrna vaccines
only one person
out of seventy thousand
died a covet death
now ask yourself
without knowing the demographic markers
of the trial participants
but knowing for a fact that hundreds of
thousands of people were dying from the
virus
does this seem to you like an
appropriate way to study severe
illness moderna told the british medical
journal in august 2020 quote you would
need a trial that is either five or ten
times larger or you'd need a trial that
is five to ten times longer to collect
those events
close quote
in a talk
based on her lancet article given to the
british medical journal's covid 19 known
unknowns vaccines webinar
in february 2021
dr suzanne hodgson
national institute for health research
academic lecturer in infectious diseases
at the university of oxford stated
quote
the current
rcts randomized control trials that are
ongoing are not powered to assess
efficacy
against hospital admission and death
close quote
in the same seminar doshi presented on
the transparency issue
having read the protocols and then the
phase iii trial studies of the pfizer
moderna astrazeneca and sputnik russian
vaccines he wanted to check the raw data
from the studies in order to verify it
that is
he wanted to see not just the final
charts
tables averages percentages and
conclusions
but to look over the individual cases
most of the studies had a line in them
that claimed such data was available
upon request
according to doshi he wrote to the drug
companies that had authored the studies
and asked to see it but he wasn't
permitted
quote
each time a trial is published there is
this data sharing statement and
everything sounds good until you read
the fine print close quote he said
quote pfizer for example says that it is
sharing data upon request
i asked the same for moderna
the same for oxford astrazeneca and the
russian vaccine
they all said they will be sharing the
data just not yet
and most are tying the data release to
the end of the trials
so we have a situation where the
vaccines are being administered to the
masses but the data isn't being shared
because the sponsors say the trials are
ongoing close quote
pfizer data he learned might arrive in
january 2025.
modernist said
it may be available once the trial is
complete
sometime in 2022
other companies were similarly vague
to date acro approximately 4 billion
people have already got these vaccines
many receiving a first of its kind mrna
genetic formulation without outside
sources reviewing the raw study data
given that the companies won't release
this data in a timely manner it is
reasonable to assume that public health
officials in different countries that
approved the vaccines
have not seen the raw data either
or run verification checks
given all this
it is difficult to assuage those who
distrust the systems that delivered the
vaccines
at least one of these vaccines the
moderna was supported by the nih and
niaid
which may have joint ownership in
intellectual property that undergirds
the vaccine
that means their budgets stand to
benefit from sales and individual
government employees may get royalties
for them
though it would fall to the fda to
officially approve the vaccines
the the advice to enact vaccine mandates
would come from a small network and
would be based on studies that were
authored in some instances by people who
are employees of the companies
themselves and which were testing their
own products
and when a remarkably trusting public
and a few scientists
requested to look at the raw data
they got stiffed
one can only imagine how enriched our
knowledge would be if it were otherwise
if to take just one example the raw data
were available and verified by the hive
mind of world scientists who drilling
down
could see for whom the vaccine was most
effective
and who was most at risk of serious side
effects in order to follow them longer
than two months and to protect those
groups of people in the future
the confidence this would have inspired
in a vaccine produced so quickly might
have been astonishing a miracle not only
of human scientific advancement
but of the human capacity for persuasive
communication and the social progress it
can generate
alas that's not what we got
the train was already barreling out of
the station
when the first vaccines were rolled out
in december 2020
fauci received his modernist shot
announcing that he wanted to get
publicly vaccinated as a symbol
quote for everyone in the country quote
i feel extreme confidence in the safety
and the efficacy of this vaccine close
quote he said
as to the question of how sick the
patients in the study were he said with
regard to pfizer it was 95 efficacious
not only against disease that is just
clinically recognizable but severe
disease close quote and he said much the
same was found for the moderna vaccine
it prevents severe disease
by the spring of 2020
the master narrative
the necessity of using one main tool the
vaccine to vanquish the enemy
was working brilliantly
government data from israel and the uk
showed that the vaccines weren't just
efficacious in clinical trials but also
effective in the real world
an april 28th article in the harvard
gazette was titled vaccines can get us
to herd immunity despite the variance
dr ugar saheen the chief executive of
bayern tech which developed the mrna
vaccine for pfizer
was quoted saying that europe would
reach herd immunity in july or august
the virus would no longer be able to
spread
in the uk freedom day was set for june
21st
later changed to july 19th
and the return to normal in other
vaccinated countries seemed not far
behind
on april 22 israel considered the
world's most vaccinated country except
for some tinier nations
for the first time recorded no daily
covet deaths
pfizer's ceo who called israel quote the
world's lab close quote
not only because it was highly
vaccinated but because it was vaccinated
early
giving the world a glimpse of its future
announced in february that the
experiment was going marvelously saying
quote the current data shows that after
six months the projection is robust
close quote
and quote there are a lot of indicators
right now that are telling us that there
is a protection against the transmission
of the disease
close quote
the uk
the second most vaccinated large nation
had a terrible death count in january
but on may 10th there was not a single
covet death in all of england northern
ireland and scotland
president biden assured the american
people confidently quote if you're
vaccinated you're protected if you're
unvaccinated you're not close quote
reiterating that being vaccinated
quote is a patriotic thing to do close
quote
this was a riff on cdc director rochelle
walensky's statement quote if you have
two doses of the vaccine of the mrna
vaccines you're protected you don't need
to wait for a booster you're protected
close quote
over the spring wolenski became an
increasingly prominent face
in the months since biden was
inaugurated a slew of officials who had
advised the trump administration were
out of the picture
dr robert redfield as head of the cdc
dr debra burks and dr scott atlas
and a new cohort was ushered in
more and more wallenski became a visible
voice
of public health
in april during a white house press
briefing barely four months after
distribution of the first vaccine doses
began wolinski announced that
the quote cdc recommends that pregnant
people receive the covet 19 vaccine
close quote
but if you checked the cd website that
day as many pregnant women and their
physicians of course did
you would have found something different
quote if you are pregnant
you may choose to receive a covert 19
vaccine
but quote
there are currently limited data on the
safety of covet 19 vaccines in pregnant
people close quote
in the press briefing wallenski had
cited a study from the new england
journal of medicine about which she said
quote
no safety concerns were observed for
people vaccinated in the third trimester
or safety concerns for their babies
close quote
the study did claim that there was no
increased incidence of fetal death or
neonatal death which was very reassuring
but it was unable to answer one of the
main questions many pregnant women are
concerned about
will these new vaccines have adverse
effects on my baby's development after
birth
the study's authors made clear that they
didn't have enough longitudinal data on
women in the first or second trimester
of pregnancy
to draw conclusions about women and
vaccinated in those two trimesters
when different organ systems develop and
that their study was therefore quote
preliminary
quote preliminary findings did not show
obvious safety signals among pregnant
persons who received
rna-covered 19 vaccines
however
more longitudinal follow-up including
follow-up of large numbers of women
vaccinated earlier in pregnancy is
necessary
to inform maternal pregnancy and infant
outcomes
recall that the vaccine rollout began in
december 2020 for older people
this study
only looked at safety data on women in
various stages of pregnancy from
december 14 2020 to february 28 2021
a two and a half month period
many women become more vigilant in
pregnancy about what they eat and what
they put into their bodies
so it should come as no surprise
that more than one woman who was either
pregnant or trying to conceive
began wondering about a question that
one of my colleagues asked me
if at the time of the study the vaccine
had only been available for two and a
half months wouldn't that mean
if it's still true that human gestation
is approximately nine months
that literally no one who had been
vaccinated early in pregnancy had yet
followed through to a full term
pregnancy
none of this is to insinuate an opinion
about the use of vaccines in pregnancy
we are here discussing how
simplifications
of what scientific studies actually show
at a particular moment
even when they turn out ultimately to be
right can generate distrust
i would venture
that what young families wanted to hear
was something both reassuring and
reflective of whatever trustworthy data
was available to date like
we are working on a longer study and
feel hopeful about it but for now we at
least know
if vaccinated in the third trimester
there is little chance the vaccine will
lead to a death
that i believe would have quelled
anxiety
but the government and its messaging
partners chose a different posture
one that suggested certainty when
important data was still yet to come
a lesson in human nature
when public health officials distrust
the public
the public will come to distrust them
take for example
an article by kimberly atkins store
senior opinion writer and columnist for
the boston globe who got the johnson and
johnson vaccine in april a week before
the fda put a pause on it because of
blood clot complications
as atkins indicates
the fda admitting that there might be a
problem as opposed to hiding it made her
more
not less
likely to believe that the institution
is on top of monitoring the vaccines
quote i want others to view this pause
not as a reason to doubt the drug
but a reason to believe in it close
quote she writes
the mainstream media in the united
states
also often downplayed potential problems
and even demonize those who took them
seriously portraying white christian
republicans as the last readout of covet
vaccine skepticism in america
but if white americans in red states
have had high rates of hesitancy african
americans and latinos have too
as we've seen in the case of african
americans hesitancy is based at least in
part on well-earned distrust
in the uk in march 2021
vaccination rights were very high in the
quote white british close quote group
91.3 percent
and british christians had the least
hesitancy whereas vaccination rates were
lower in the black african and black
caribbean communities
58.8 percent and 68.7 respectively and
among muslims
buddhists sikhs and hindus
in canada
the typical vaccine-hesitant person is a
40-year-old woman who tends to vote
liberal
a january gallup poll showed that 34
percent of u.s frontline health care
workers said they did not plan to get
vaccinated and an additional 18 were not
sure what they would do
given the who's own definition of the
vaccine hesitant people who delay or are
reluctant to take a vaccine one could
say that 52 percent of front-line u.s
healthcare workers were vaccine hesitant
at the beginning of the year
it was hard to argue that these were
people who got all their information
from a few rancid conspiracy websites
in fact
many of these professionals are
vaccinated for other illnesses
nor can we argue that frontline workers
are overly anxious and cowardly
many are exposed to active covert
regularly
at other times we are told that the
hesitant are only those with the least
education
but a carnegie mellon and university of
pittsburgh study showed that by may 2021
quote phds were the most hesitant group
close quote
in may senator richard burr of the u.s
senate committee on health
asked fauci how many employees of the
nih the nation's premier health science
research institution had been vaccinated
i'm not 100 sure senator but i think
it's probably a little bit more than
half probably around 60 percent he said
the senator asked the same question of
dr peter marks director of the center
for biologics evaluation and research at
the food and drug administration about
the fda employee's vaccination
quote it's probably in the same range
close quote he answered
in studies in the west
the hesitant repeatedly expressed as the
top reason for their reluctance to get
vaccinated
concerns about what we might call future
unknown effects
in a may study of britain for instance
42.7 percent cited this as their biggest
fear
the hesitant were not particularly
concerned about trivial short-term side
effects like sore arms fatigue or a
passing fever or headache
only 7.6 were distrustful of vaccination
generally
in the united states
a multi-university study of over 20 000
people found safety concerns
or uncertainty of the risk as the top
reason given for vaccine hesitancy fifty
nine percent
only thirty three percent agree that
vaccines are thoroughly tested in
advance of release
the authors reported quote
massive differences between the
vaccinated and the unvaccinated in terms
of their trust of different people and
organizations close quote including the
cdc and the fda
an ipso world economic forum survey of
15 countries
showed that in all 15 countries the
leading reason the reluctant gave was
fear of side effects
exceeding all other concerns by far
in all countries surveyed
the number of people who said they were
quote against vaccines close quote in
other words the anti-vax position
was generally a minor fraction
of those who hadn't yet been vaccinated
a common theme in france britain and the
united states in fact is distrust of the
vaccine troika big pharma government and
public health and the health care
industry
and an insistence that individuals
should have the right to decide whether
to get vaccinated
these similarities are worth paying
attention to
because they suggest that the attempt to
explain the phenomenon by using the
group identifiers american media is so
fond of sex race religion and political
affiliation
falls short
and shifts attention away
from the real issues creating distrust
on may 11th
fauci appeared in front of a senate
hearing
quote
the nih and the niaid categorically has
not funded gain of function research to
be conducted in the wuhan institute of
virology
he said
yet
in a circumvention of the obama
administration's 2014 moratorium
and to the disapproval of many in the
u.s scientific community
fauci's agency did fund a u.s company
called eco health alliance which then
facilitated gain of function research in
collaboration with the wuhan institute
of virology
indeed from june 2014 to may 2019
fauci's agency funded eco-health and
peter daszak a well-known gain of
function researcher who subcontracted
the grant to the wuhan lab where gain of
function research on bat viruses was
conducted
and led by dr xi zheng li
and which wasn't subject to the u.s
government moratorium
dr francis collins then head of the nih
had told the house appropriations
subcommittee that the nih did not fund
gain of function in wuhan
but later
after fauci reversed his prior claim and
said it was possible
collins also backtracked quote
we of course do not have internal
insight as to what was going on in the
wuhan institute of virology close quote
he said
both reversals came only after the
plausibility of the lab leak theory
started to gain mainstream acceptance
and public pressure mounted
while felchi's denial in the senate
might have been technically accurate it
was misleading
neither agency directly funded this kind
of research but did do so through a
third party
as it turned out
fauci himself wrote in 2012 that he like
gain of function critics could imagine
quote an important gain of function
experiment involving a virus with
serious pandemic potential
quote
whereby
quote an unlikely but conceivable turn
of events close quote leads to an
infection of someone in the lab quote
and ultimately triggers a pandemic close
quote
nonetheless he wrote
for quote the resulting knowledge close
quote such research might yield
it was worth the risk
in june the question of what fouch he
knew and when he knew it came up in his
emails
which showed that although he denied to
congress that his organization funded
experiments at the wuhan institute of
virology it had
on february 1st 2020 fauci sent two
emails to his staff about a quote gain
of function close quote study
the nih had approved in which he
referred to quote sar's gain of function
close quote
his denial of gain of function
ultimately proved unconvincing since
funding of it was already part of the
nih committee and grant paper trail
xi zheng li the head of the wuhan
institute of virology co-authored a
paper about constructing a super lethal
virus which appeared in nature medicine
in 2015
and specifically thanked the nih and
ecohealth for funding her work
a 2017 research article
also with zangli as co-author not only
qualifies as gain of function research
but epitomizes it
and specifically states that it was
funded by an nih niaid grant
all of this was important
because it was part of the larger story
that the public was following
learning that the agencies and officials
charged with leading americans out of
the pandemic
in fact had links to a chinese lab with
a history of safety violations and which
also appeared to be involved in
dangerous experiments that might be
linked to the outbreak in wuhan was for
many profoundly unsettling
meanwhile
the enmeshment between the fda and
pharma was becoming more relevant
in june it was announced that stephen
hahn who had led the fda from december
17 2019
until january 20
2021 during which time the agency
approved the moderna and pfizer vaccines
became chief medical officer of flagship
pioneering
the venture capital firm that launched
moderna in 2010 and now owns 4 billion
of modernist stock
on june 27th scott gottlieb
who headed the fda before han
joined the board of pfizer
on june 3 three scientists from an fda
advisory committee dr aaron kesselheim
professor of medicine at harvard medical
school joel perlmutter md a neurologist
at washington university in saint louis
and david naughtmann md a neurologist at
the mayo clinic resigned because of the
way an alzheimer's drug adulhelm was
approved in a letter kesselheim claimed
that the authorization of attu helm
a monthly intravenous infusion that
biogem is priced at 56 000 per year
which some worry could bankrupt medicare
was wrong quote because of so many
different factors starting from the fact
that there's no good evidence that the
drug works close quote
that it was quote probably the worst
drug approval decision in recent u.s
history close quote and that this quote
debical highlights problems close quote
with the fda advisory committee
relationship
it's worth translating this episode into
plain english
in the middle of the biggest vaccine
rollout in u.s history
which the government determined to be
the only way out of the pandemic
but which also faced stiff headwinds of
deep-seated popular hesitancy
the fda approved a drug that would line
a pharmaceutical company's pockets with
billions of taxpayer dollars
even though studies showed the drug did
little
but raised false hopes
kesselheim wasn't being rash
as it was apparently the second time
he'd seen this kind of thing up close
in 2016 the director of the fda's center
for drug evaluation and research
dr janet woodcott
approved a drug called ediplerson
over the objections of all the main cyan
fda scientific reviewers
the grounds for the approval were not
the patients got better they didn't
rather a kind of lab value which can
function as a biomarker or indicator of
disease improved
another pharma trick
that was taken as good enough evidence
to approve the drug
as kesselheim and co-author jerry avron
later warned in the journal of the
american medical association quote
speeding drugs to market based on such
biomarker outcomes can actually lead to
a worse outcome for patients
soon after kesselheim's departure in
june
the fda's two top vaccine officials
announced they were also leaving
reports explained that dr marion gruber
director of the fda office of vaccines
research and review and a 32-year agency
veteran
and dr phillip krauss a 10-year veteran
were leaving because of outside pressure
by the biden administration to approve
boosters before the fda had completed
its own approval process
meanwhile pfizer
doing more
science by press release a technique
that often jacks up a company's stock
was calling for boosters while quote
hailing great results with covet 19
boosters and shots for school-age
children close quote
in a piece in the lancet
on september 13th
gruber krauss and multiple international
colleagues raised a red flag about
pushing through a booster to the in the
general population
quote
there could be risks if boosters are
widely introduced too soon or too
frequently
especially with vaccines that can have
immune mediated side effects such as
myocarditis which is more common after
the second dose of some mrna vaccines
or guillain-barre syndrome which has
been associated with adenovectored
covert 19 vaccines like the astrazeneca
or johnson johnson
if unnecessary boosting causes
significant adverse reactions there
could be implications for vaccine
acceptance that go beyond covet 19
vaccines
thus
widespread boosting should be undertaken
only if there is clear evidence that it
is appropriate close quote
the pfizer study was surprisingly tiny
only 306 people were given the booster
as vaccine researcher david wiseman who
did trials for rival johnson johnson
pointed out at the fda meeting
quote there was no randomized control
close quote in the pfizer study
the subjects were younger 18 to 55 than
the people who are at most at risk
of covert death or serious illness and
were followed
only for a month
so we didn't actually know how long the
booster would last or if adverse events
might show up after 30 days
they were not followed clinically so
there was no information on infections
hospitalizations or deaths rather only
their antibodies were measured
precisely the kind of shortcut that was
taken with the
person
the study was too small and the fda
panel held two votes on approval
in the first it voted overwhelmingly 16
to 2 against
approving fiser boosters for all ages
in the second vote the panel supported
boosters only for people over 65 or
special at-risk groups
and yet
in mid-august
biden began publicly supporting boosters
for all
why
on september 16th the los angeles times
reported that the president was
following the advice
of fauci and the nih with the help of dr
janet woodcock
the same fda official who overrode fda
reviewers in the etiplerson incident
woodcott was by that point acting fda
commissioner and was going around the
fda committee once again
it was not only the pfizer booster study
that was weak
a new england journal of medicine study
based on israeli ministry of health data
claimed that third shot boosters give 11
times the protection of two
but the entire study lasted only a month
and thus showed it was protected for
that period
but not whether it would last as long
or longer than the second shot's
protection
during the spring of 2021
another wrinkle had emerged
along with the widespread attacks on
scientists who had criticisms of the
simplified master narrative
including ones from major universities
like harvard yale stanford rockefeller
oxford and ucla
many average americans learned that
certain major stories weren't as widely
known as they might have been
thanks in part to censorship by big tech
in may
facebook announced that it would no
longer censor stories about the lab leak
theory which was how many people found
out that it was in fact a viable
scientific theory in the first place
facebook's idea of transparency is
telling you when it stops censoring
something
the same goes for youtube
but in july the who itself admitted that
it had been too hasty in ruling out a
lab leak
nicholas wade's excellent may 2nd
article by contrast showed the technical
virological reasons for why the virus
might well have come from gain of
function research
we also learned more about big tech's
motives when it was revealed that
google's charity arm had funded the same
gain of function researcher
that the nih had funded peter dazak of
equal health
at times big tech's censorship of quote
misinformation close quote coincides
with its financial interests amazon
which is banned and unbanned books
critical of the master narrative has
been looking into developing a major
pharmacy division
meanwhile
three u.s medical boards the american
board of family medicine
the american board of internal medicine
and the american board of pediatrics
went beyond censorship by threatening to
revoke licenses from physicians who
question the current but shifting line
of covert thinking and protocols
this forced doctors who had any doubts
about the master narrative to choose
between their patients and their
livelihoods
things got so bad globally that amnesty
international eventually issued a report
on this crisis quote
across the world journalists political
activists
medical professionals
whistleblowers and human rights
defenders who expressed critical
opinions of their government's response
to the crisis have been censored
harassed
attacked and criminalized close quote
it noted
the typical tactic the report's authors
say is quote target 1 intimidate a
thousand close quote whereby censors
justify these actions as simply banning
misinformation and preventing panic
the report goes on quote
evidence has shown that harsh measures
to suppress the free flow of information
such as censorship or the
criminalization of fake news
can lead to increased mistrust in the
authorities
promote space for conspiracy theories to
grow
and the suppression of legitimate debate
and concerns close quote
censorship nourishes the weed it
purports to exterminate
it is of course vital that public health
officials
be able to lead in a crisis convey
consistent messages and even ask
citizens to change their behaviors
but the only way public health can
legitimately ask for such changes is
because the policies it recommends are
based on a scientific process that is
solid enough to withstand scientific
criticism and debate
why else should anybody listen
science is not itself
dogma or an authoritarian discipline but
the opposite
a process of critical inquiry
and the method requires ongoing debate
about how to interpret new data
and even what constitutes relevant data
science as the nobel prize winning
physicist richard feyman pointed out
requires questioning assertions quote
learn from science that you must doubt
the experts
when someone says science teaches such
and such he's using the word incorrectly
science doesn't teach it experience
teaches it
if they say to you science has shown
such and such you might ask how does
science show it how did the scientists
find out how what where
not science has shown but this
experiment this effect has shown
and you have as much right as anyone
else upon hearing about the experiments
but we must listen to all the evidence
to judge
whether a reusable conclusion has been
arrived at
close quote
note how emphatic phamen is that it's
not just the few who conduct the
experiments or even just the experts who
have the right to discuss and judge the
matter
this is especially true in public health
because the field is so broad and
composed of many disciplines from those
that deal narrowly with the viruses to
those that deal with mass behavioral
changes
when public health and allied medical
and educational organizations censor
scientists and health care professionals
for debating scientific controversies
thus giving the public the false
impression that there are no legitimate
controversies
they misrepresent and grievously harm
science
medicine
and the public
by removing the only justification
public health has for asking citizens to
undergo various privations
but these requests are based on a full
unhampered and open scientific process
those who censor or block this process
undermine their own claim to speak in
the name of science
or public safety
if we didn't get to have a properly open
scientific process
what did we get instead
government enmeshment with legally
indemnified corporations
public health officials misleading
congress
multiple honest regulators leaving the
fda because of inappropriate approvals
fda heads taking big pharma jobs
directly related to products they had
just been involved in improving
a possible lab leak that couldn't be
discussed as such for more than a year
so that it couldn't be clearly
disconfirmed
faceless social media platforms
admitting that they control what we see
and don't see
and institutional censorship of many
kinds
if you were trying to create the perfect
conditions for public skepticism about
vaccines
in the midst of a pandemic
could you have done any better than this
over the summer the master narrative
began to show cracks
by august 18th
israel had the world's third highest
number of new cases per capita
the health ministry retroactively
released numbers showing that by
mid-summer the pfizer vaccine
which had been used in israel
extensively
was only 39
effective in preventing covet infections
though much more effective in preventing
severe disease
but
additional data
showed that at a time when 62 of the
entire israeli population had been
vaccinated
over 60 percent of israel's 400
hospitalized coveted cases were patients
who'd been fully vaccinated
this meant that the vaccine was much
more leaky than expected
by september 14th
israel's health ministry director
general
nachman ash reported that the country
even more heavily vaccinated than it had
been in the summer
with 3 million mostly elderly of its 9
million citizens already having had a
third shot
was now recording 10 000 new covet cases
a day quote that is a record that did
not exist in the previous waves
close quote nachman said
it was also the highest number of covet
cases per capita of any country
beating out mongolia and making israel
the quote covet capital of the world
just months after leading the charge on
vaccines close
quote many argued correctly yes
these breakthrough cases do occur
but they are usually mild and the
vaccines are very good at protecting
people from severe illness and death
but then conflicting statistics began to
emerge
israeli hospitals were so overloaded
they were turning away covet patients
400 died in the first two weeks of
september
hospital staff were worn out and in a
traumatic state
with one hospital director describing
the situation as quote catastrophic
adding that
quote the public knows absolutely
nothing about it close quote
the israeli ministry of health
statistics from august showed that of
those deaths that had been classified
more than twice as many who died were
fully vaccinated 272
as opposed to those who were not
vaccinated
by late september the data was in for
the fourth wave and dr sharon alroy
price of the israeli ministry of health
revealed to the fda vaccine advisory
committee that quote
what we saw prior to our booster
campaign
was that 60 of people in severe and
critical condition were immunized doubly
immunized fully vaccinated and as i said
45 of people who died in the fourth wave
were doubly vaccinated close quote
israeli vaccine czar salman zarka
doubled down and said the country now
had to contemplate a fourth dose
in another five months quote this is our
life from now on in waves quote he said
israeli prime minister naftali bennett
echoed this on september 13th
blaming six patients who were
hospitalized because they were quote not
fully vaccinated quote by which he meant
they had only had two jabs
divisive terms are easily turned on
those who recently used them
now the stigma that attended the
unvaccinated
also applied to the vaccinated but not
vaccinated enough
throughout the pandemic israel had
extensive lockdowns
in contrast sweden became famous for
never having lockdown
israel and sweden have about the same
size population 9 million and 10 million
respectively
and have almost identical rates of
double vaccinated people
if you take in all ages including
children 63
israel 67 sweden
but if anything israel has the edge over
sweden because 43 percent of israelis
are also triple vaccinated
yet the difference
in the number of hospitalized patients
is staggering
for the week of september 12 2021
israel had
1386 covet hospitalizations which was
four times that of sweden 340.
israel had a rolling 7da average of 2.89
deaths per million
compared to a much lower number of
deaths in sweden
0.15
what can you account for this
many argue that because sweden where
public health works on a voluntary
participatory basis
never locked down
many more people there were exposed and
got natural immunity
the swedes had hoped to protect the most
vulnerable in nursing homes which they
failed to do because of poorly trained
staff
but in this they were no different from
most western nations that did lock down
sweden also suffered more deaths for a
hundred thousand than israel overall
but through the summer of 2021
sweden dropped to about 1.5 deaths a day
from culvert
its hospitals were never overwhelmed
suggesting
that
once sweden's natural herd immunity was
established
combined with its vaccines
it was now more protective than israel's
largely vaccine-based immunity
this
wasn't what the master narrative had
promised
israel was the world's lab experiment
because being so early to complete a
vaccine rollout on a large scale
about three months ahead of the united
states
it was supposed to be a glimpse of
everyone else's future
its people did seem to be among the
first to break free of cobit
but they were now the first to show that
the vaccine could wane
it's not that the vaccinated in the
united states weren't doing better than
the unvaccinated in terms of
hospitalization for covet they
definitely were
the fear rather was that this might only
prove to be a short-term benefit
in the summer the cdc
behind on reporting of its own u.s data
in real time had been advised that the
fisa vaccine was leading to breakthrough
cases in the vaccinated in israel
but it did not share this hole in the
master narrative with outside public
officials until one month later as the
washington post reported quote what is
very concerning is that we're not seeing
the data it needs to come out close
quote said former head of the cdc tom
freedom
quote
what you can criticize the cdc for
validly is why aren't you talking about
the studies you're doing of
breakthroughs close quote
because there'd been such a lag time
some people wondered if the cdc was
hiding something quote
and these are the people who are
potentially friendly to the cdc quote
said frieden
quote so you know you're in trouble when
even your friends are suspicious of your
motives close quote
in the united states a mayo clinic study
found the fisa vaccine was 42 percent
effective at stopping people from
getting infected between january and
july
in the uk
nearly 50 percent of new covet cases in
the summer were among the vaccinated
each day there were about 15 000 new
symptomatic cases in people who had been
partially or fully vaccinated
as of july 15 new cases among the
unvaccinated
17581 were falling
and new cases among the fully or
partially vaccinated
15537 increasing
and set to overtake
the unvaccinated
according to the cdc
of the 469 attendances at provincetown
massachusetts celebrations in july that
tested positive for covet
had been fully vaccinated
scientists determined that those with
such vaccine breakthrough infections can
carry viral loads as big as infected
unvaccinated people
vaccinated people were not just
infecting others they were also clearly
not completely immune themselves
though perhaps they were infectious for
a briefer period
the cdc also emphasized this study to
support its new policy of asking the
vaccinated to wear masks
on cnn wolf blitzer asked walensky if
she got the messaging wrong and hadn't
been nuanced enough
she answered that the breakthrough
infections tended to be mild
blitzer then asked whether those who
were vaccinated and had breakthrough
infections could pass the virus on to
older people
or more vulnerable people wallenski
answered
quote our vaccines are working
exceptionally well
they continue to work well for delta
with regard to severe illness and death
they prevent it
but what they can't do anymore is
prevent transmission close quote
she said so to suggest to people who
were vaccinated that if they were going
home to people who are immunosuppressed
or frail or with comorbidities they
should wear a mask
it was a nuanced response and admitted a
problem
a performance like that might have
because it was honest enhanced vaccine
confidence
unfortunately the mainstream media was
so over committed to a master narrative
that promised 95 effectiveness for the
vaccines
which it also believed implied stopping
transmission
that it was caught off guard
instead of asking whether scientists had
compared the infectiousness of the
vaccinated with that of the unvaccinated
the media took wallensky's statement to
mean that vaccinated people with
breakthrough infections were just as
likely to infect others as those who
were not vaccinated and now had covet
in this way
the episode transmitted more reasons for
the vaccine hesitance to have doubts
internal documents showed
that at this point the cdc was
scrambling to change its messaging
moving from the master narrative
simplification that quote vaccines are
effective against disease
close quote to the idea that vaccines
are essential because they protect
against death and hospitalization
the agency even changed its official
definition of what a vaccine does from
producing immunity
to a specific disease
to producing protection from it
the fda had originally said
that a vaccine less than 50 percent
effective defined as reducing the risk
of having to see a doctor
would not be approved by regulators
now something that appeared to the
public to be significantly less
effective
was being not just approved
but mandated
according to israel's health ministry
the pfizer vaccine data showed that in
those who were vaccinated as early as
january about five months prior
it was only 16 effective
a large study in qatar showed that the
vaccine was waning at five months
in the united states a mayo clinic found
the pfizer vaccine to drop to 42
effectiveness while the cdc found it
dropped to 66 percent in just under four
months of use
u.s statistics showed that the
vaccinated were still overall far less
likely to get infected than the
unvaccinated or to get serious illness
but
israel had been vaccinated earlier than
the united states
so what lay ahead for america
it is noteworthy
that this was the moment
that u.s government officials
and the media chose to assume
soon on a daily basis
that the country was now in a quote
pandemic of the unvaccinated close quote
even though it was now clear that the
vaccinated could get infected and
transmit the virus
every day famous americans including
entertainers athletes and politicians
who had been doubly vaccinated were
having breakthrough infections
the message that
this is only an epidemic of the
unvaccinated is falling flat close quote
noted harvard epidemiologist
michael minna
by this point
the hesitant were no longer the only
ones who had doubts
there were many anecdotal reports of
great worry about breakthrough cases
among the vaccinated including among
those who put much faith in vaccines
because their immune systems were
compromised by age or illness
headlines about waning vaccines
expressed despair that this pandemic
might never end
instead of addressing how this
disappointment might affect people
u.s public health talking heads and
twitter certified human nature experts
turn now to behavioral psychology a very
american form of psychology to deal with
the crisis
treating their fellow citizens like
children or lab rats to be given rewards
when good and punishments went bad
some seemed to relish telling people
that they didn't just do what the
experts told them to do they'd lose
their jobs their place in school or some
other basic need like mobility
other more data-driven thinkers
including pro-vaccine physicians like
eric topol head of scripps research and
a man who regards the production of the
mrna vaccine as quote one of science and
medical research's greatest achievements
close quote
now seem quite concerned about the
israeli data
topple assembled many articles showing
how vaccinated populations still fare
much better relative to unvaccinated
populations in the united states
but he also pointed out that
breakthrough infections can't just be
written off as simply caused by the new
delta variant escaping vaccine
protection
israeli data showed that the potency of
the vaccines was fading after five
months
contrary to what pfizer claimed
thus the data showed that the earlier
one was vaccinated the less protection
one had against delta
that finding was crucial because it
meant that the new wave in israel was
not simply caused because of a new
variant that came along
the vaccines were losing potency over
time
fauci and surgeon general vivek murthy
stuck to their guns continuing to
emphasize to the public that the vast
majority of all cova deaths
99.2 percent according to fouchy and
99.5
according to murthy were among the
unvaccinated
a narrative that was picked up by news
outlets
which started reporting obsessively
about states with high and vaccinated
rates and filling the news cycle with
one story after another about stupid
retrograde americans succumbing to covet
their final wish not being for those
they loved but for their medical
practitioner to broadcast to the world
their vaccine regret
but
as david wallace wells showed on august
12th in new york magazine
fauci's and murthy's numbers were not
rooted in what was currently happening
in america
they were instead based on the covet
death data from january 1st 2021 to date
if you think this through
you'll see what's obviously wrong
for the first months of the year
few americans were yet vaccinated
so of course most deaths would
technically be among the unvaccinated
quote
two-thirds of 2021 cases and 80 percent
of deaths came before april 1st when
only 15 percent of the country was fully
vaccinated close quote wallace wells
wrote
quote which means calculating
year-to-date ratios
means possibly underestimating the
prevalence of breakthrough cases
by a factor of three and breakthrough
deaths by a factor of five close quote
what we desperately needed was a
comparison of vaccinated to unvaccinated
people by each month
but as wallace wells noted grimly quote
unfortunately
more accurate month-to-month data is
hard to assemble
because the cdc stopped tracking most
breakthrough cases
in early may
wallace wells cited a new york times
analysis that claimed the vaccines were
working to suppress severe outcomes from
covet infection by more than a factor of
a hundred for some states
but as topol told wallace wells quote
the breakthrough problem is much more
concerning than what our public health
officials have transmitted
we have no good tracking
but every indicator i have suggests
there is a lot more under the radar
than is being told to the public so far
which is unfortunate close quote the
result topol said was a widening gap
between the messaging from public health
authorities and the meaning of the data
emerging in real time quote
i think the problem we have is people
whether it's the cdc or the people that
are doing the briefings
their big concern is
they just want to get vaccinations up
and they don't want to punch any holes
in the story about vaccines
but we can handle the truth
and that's what we should be getting
close quote
on august 23rd
fda approval of the pfizer vaccine came
through
it was based on the same patients who
are in the study that previously
included only two months of follow-up
but which now had six months of
follow-up
with the approval
pfizer officially stopped the randomized
control trials and informed the controls
they never got the vaccine
now that they know they are not
vaccinated the controls may well choose
or be mandated to get vaccinated
so we won't be able to follow them as a
control group anymore
that means
the only randomized control trials we
have of these vaccines are just six
months long
should some new independent party not a
drug company want to do a new randomized
control trial of the vaccine
they will find it almost impossible to
do so because it'll be hard if not
impossible to find people who are not
vaccinated or not already exposed to
covet
this is especially important because we
don't yet we can't yet have any good
randomized control trial data to rule
out long-term effects
vaccine supporters including government
officials will say quote there's not
been a serious side effect in history
that hasn't occurred within six weeks of
getting the dose close quote
but
as doshi and others argue there are
examples of long-term problems that come
to light after two months for example
doshi points out that it took nine
months to detect that thirteen hundred
people who received
glaxosmithkline's pander mix influenza
vaccine after the 2009 swine flu
outbreak developed narcolepsy
thought to be caused by the vaccine
myocarditis
inflammation of the heart tissue is a
rare but real side effect in young males
about ages 16 to 29 that did not show up
in the two-month-long trials that led to
the emergency youth authorization
even though those studies included males
as young as 16.
it was not generally recognized by the
scientific community or our safety
report systems until four months into
the vaccine rollout
and we are still learning about how this
manifests in vaccinated males
in general severe myocarditis can lead
to scarring and even cause death so it
must be taken seriously and followed
long term
right now paul offit professor of
vaccinology at the university of
pennsylvania
says that most cases are mild and
resolve on their own
the actual fda approval for the pfizer
vaccine acknowledges higher rates of
myocarditis and pericarditis in males
now and states the obvious quote
information is not yet available about
potential long-term health outcomes
the komernati the new name for the
pfizer vaccine prescribing information
includes a warning about these risks
close quote
an israeli study found that in boys age
12 to 15
myocarditis occurred in only 162 cases
out of a million but this rate was four
to six times higher than their chances
of being hospitalized for a severe case
of covet
but to get a sense of the complexity of
the decision-facing parents
in the united states the situation keeps
changing with more and more cases of
children now showing up in hospitals for
covet
the decision is further complicated by
the crucial fact that covet can cause
myocarditis as well and we're just now
learning that different vaccines seem to
cause myocarditis at different rates
as of october several countries
including norway sweden and denmark have
put the moderna vaccine which is
especially potent on pause for younger
people and iceland has suspended it for
all ages
but these countries are not ending
childhood vaccination just recommending
different vaccines
we're lucky to have options but we could
use good studies comparing the
covet-induced myocarditis rates and the
vaccine-induced myocarditis rates by age
and sex
which is why it's so unfortunate that
the rcts were not much larger and that
they didn't go on longer
had they continued and if their data
ever became transparent
it could really help us in assessing
long-term safety in a more reassuring
way that's what rcts are good at
one can more persuasively demonstrate
that a vaccine doesn't have these
effects if there's a proper vaccine-free
covet-free control group
but if vaccines continue to be pushed as
the one and only answer we will never
know if certain health problems emerge
because there will be no normal
vaccine-free group left for comparison
it's a development that's quite
disconcerting for it suggests a wish not
to know
when the pandemic first broke
many were certain that the developing
countries
with their inability to afford vaccines
malnutrition crowded cities and lower
numbers of health workers would be
universally devastated
but that prediction turned out not to be
true
the population of ethiopia is about 119
million
just over one third of the united states
covet vaccination rates are very low
there 2.7 percent have had at least one
shot
and 0.9 percent have had two
as of september 28 2021 the country
recorded only 5
439 covet deaths over the course of the
entire pandemic
if the united states had such a death
rate per capita
it would have lost just over sixteen
thousand people
rather than over seven hundred thousand
why does ethiopia have such
comparatively low numbers
it's not that the country was late to
the pandemic it recorded its first case
in march 2020
it had three comparatively small waves
in july and august 2020
april 2021
and most recently in august september
during these waves the daily deaths
averaged about 37
and 48 people a day
the country had very brief lockdowns in
select harder hit towns at the beginning
of the pandemic
and brief periods during which large
gatherings schools stadiums and
nightclubs were closed
then during the second wave of april
2021 hospital capacity and oxygen
supplies were stretched
but by june 2021
ethiopian physician friends with whom i
was in weekly contact
told me that they could see the second
wave receding
as numbers were decreasing and hospital
occupancy with covet cases was going
down
all this occurred
with only about one percent of the
country vaccinated
mostly the country's healthcare workers
the elderly and key hotspots and the
vulnerable
now the third wave appears to be
receding especially in the capital addis
ababa
the ethiopian physicians i know
extremely skilled
are also more accustomed to serious
infectious disease than many western
physicians and have a different attitude
towards herd immunity
when they saw that the death counts were
low compared to other countries
they didn't advocate to keep the country
closed observing as one put it it's
running through taking its natural
course
and lockdowns will only delay resolution
close quote
for part of the covet period there has
been armed conflict in one ethiopian
province which could be affecting
numbers
still
how are numbers anywhere close to this
low even possible and what might be
learned
interestingly neighboring kenya also
reports a similarly low death rate
clearly what determines the death count
in at least some countries is far more
than vaccination rates
there is the average age of the
population in ethiopia the median age is
19.5 years in the united states 38.3
years
population density
ethiopia is about 80 percent rural
travel within the country
ethiopians rarely travel outside their
own province or far from their villages
ventilation
most ethiopians live in thatched huts
and even in the cities homes are
draftier and more open sun exposure
hence vitamin d levels protected
exercise
ethiopians are always walking with three
cars per thousand people
and possible seasonal effects
they also had fewer lockdowns
and so they may have more natural
immunity
crucially
levels of obesity
being overweight and type 2 diabetes
are almost non-existent in ethiopia but
epidemic in the united states the uk and
australia
staggeringly
none of these factors is even mentioned
in the master narrative
yet their cumulative potency in
protecting a population seems in
ethiopia for the last 18 months until
now
to have been very protective
a study of 160 countries in 2020
showed that the risk of death from covet
is 10 times higher in countries like the
united states where the majority of the
population
67.9 percent
is overweight or obese
cdc data shows that a whopping 78
of all hospitalized cases in the united
states and therefore
most at risk of death suffered from
obesity or being overweight
by lowering immunity obesity increases
the chance of severe illness and also
decreases vaccine efficacy as has been
shown in studies of the flu vaccine
another key element left out of
america's master narrative is the role
of natural immunity
after 18 months of near total silence
about it
fauci was asked by cnn's sanjay kupta
about a study that showed natural
immunity provides a lot of protection
better than the vaccines alone
gupta asked fauci if people who already
had covet needed to get vaccinated
quote
i don't have a really firm answer for
you on that close quote fauci said
quote that's something we're going to
have to discuss close quote
instead
the u.s administration and media still
maintain
with a kind of ideological fervor
that everyone must get vaccinated even
the already immune
on the face of it
this is a strange assumption because
vaccines work
by triggering our pre-existing immune
system
and by exposing it to part of the virus
if our bodies can't produce good
immunity by exposure to the virus they
won't usually be able to produce it by
exposure to a vaccine which happens in
immunocompromised people all the time
vaccine immunity relies on the body's
ability to produce natural immunity
an epidemiologist named dr martin mccary
of johns hopkins university showed that
about half of unvaccinated americans
have been exposed to the virus and
therefore
are already immune
by december 2020 over a hundred million
americans had been exposed to the virus
and 120 million by january 31st
according to a columbia university study
now 10 months later
with the more infectious delta variant
the number is probably closer to 170
million or half the country
are the immune unvaccinated safe for
others to be around
according to mccary we have more than 15
studies showing that natural immunity is
very strong and lasts a long time
so far the length of the entire pandemic
and it is effective against new variants
the reinfection rate for someone who had
covet was shown to be
0.65 percent in a danish study or one
percent in a british study and some
others
a number of studies suggest it may last
for years
even when antibodies go down cells in
the marrow are ready to produce them
there is one cdc study often used to
justify vaccinating the already immune
but it is an outlier
to its credit
the study begins by stating that quote
few real world epidemiological studies
exist
to support the benefit of vaccination
for previously infected persons
close quote
it then purports to show that covet
vaccine immunity is 2.3 times as
protective as natural immunity
based on a single two-month study from
kentucky
makari says that the study was quote
dishonest close quote and asked why the
cdc
chose just two months of data to
evaluate when it had 19 months worth on
hand
and quote why one state when you have 50
states close quote
but perhaps the key weakness as
harvard's martin kuldar points out
is that they used a positive pcr test
to measure whether someone was infected
and not whether the person actually
experienced a symptomatic infection the
key point
the problem with the pcr test is it is
good at detecting viral dna
but can't distinguish whether the
materials are intact particles which are
infectious
or merely degraded fragments which are
not
but when actual symptomatic infection
has been looked at
natural immunity comes out better
a huge israeli study of about 76 000
people the largest on the subject
has compared the rate of symptomatic
reinfection in those who had been
vaccinated the breakthrough infection
rate
with the symptomatic reinfection of
those who had covet
the data has been circulated though not
yet peer-reviewed and it is consistent
with other studies showing better
protection for the previously infected
it found that people who had a previous
coveted infection and beat it with
natural immunity
in january or february 2021
were 27 times less likely
to get a symptomatic reinfection
than those who got immunity from the
vaccine
a washington university study showed
that even a mild infection gives
long-lasting immunity
along with mccary of johns hopkins
among those on record willing to
question the need for vaccination of the
already immune are doctors koldorf the
harvard epidemiologist
vinay prasad a hematologist oncologist
an associate professor of epidemiology
and biostatistics at the university of
california san francisco
harvey rich
a yale epidemiologist and jayanta
bhattacharya a stanford epidemiologist
offit who is on the fda vaccine advisory
committee is an interesting case as he
both argues for mandates but concedes
that it's reasonable for the already
immune to not want to be vaccinated
asked by the pro-vaccine zubin damania a
stanford trained internist who goes by
the pseudonym zdoggmd on his viral
interview show
what he would say to someone who asks
why should i be forced compelled
mandated to get a vaccine when i've
gotten natural covet off it answered i
think that's fair i think if you've been
naturally infected it's reasonable that
you could say look i believe i'm
protected based on studies that show i
have high frequencies of memory plasma
blasts in my bone marrow i'm good i
think that's a reasonable argument close
quote
the problem as often noted in another
interview
quote is that bureaucratically it's a
nightmare close quote
but a bureaucratic problem is not a
scientific one
which is how this is widely presented
and the question is a problem compared
to what
several million immune people fired and
now resentful of public health
when asked by demania whether there
might be a test that can prove a person
has had covert or and recovered and thus
has natural immunity often explained
that there is a blood test for
antibodies to the nuclear protein of the
virus which could show up if someone had
had the virus and is now immune
imagine how much mental anguish and
needless societal disruption might be
relieved
if among the billions we are spending we
spent enough to make such tests widely
available
indeed
the very fact that we frame the threat
debate between the vaccinated and the
unvaccinated has always been peculiar
some epidemiologists point out that the
categories we should be thinking of
instead are the immune and those who are
not immune
the european union has a digital covet
certificate which is not limited to
proof of vaccination you can get one and
travel if you've been vaccinated or if
you've recovered from covet 19.
this allows travel among all eu member
states
american officials always proclaim
they're following the science
but obviously
if the science gave clear orders
then european scientists would have
received them too
let's say
for the purpose of argument that you
accept natural immunity as equally good
or better than vaccine immunity
what are the ethical consequences
vaccinating people who've had covet
without informing them that the data
says they don't need it
overrides both informed consent
and the classical medical ethic of not
treating without a medical necessity
when one gives any intervention that is
not medically necessary or especially
beneficial
then the cost-benefit analysis of risk
versus little or no benefit
is weighted in favor of risk
which overrides the first principle of
hippocratic medicine
first
do no harm
it's also arguably selfish to vaccinate
those in wealthy countries who already
have natural immunity for it deprives
poor countries short of vaccines
of protection for their vulnerable
populations
it's not lost on the vaccine hesitant
that vaccine exemptions for those who
already had covet would immediately
slash the projected profits of big
pharma
pharma knows that poor countries
might not be able to afford the
leftovers at full fee
vaccination is a tool
a means to an end
immunity
but the american government has made the
means
vaccination
the new end
this strange substitution or reversal
reveals the master narrative to be the
expression not of
science but of a new kind of scientific
ideology
which we might call vaccineism
but vaccine ism is not a treatment
it's a mindset
one that takes a wonderful invention
which
if used properly and carefully
can be outstandingly productive
and makes it the only tool worth having
until it becomes at times
counterproductive it makes no exceptions
indeed it's insulted by the idea of any
exemptions
in its all-or-nothing approach
it is the ideological mirror of
anti-vaxxism
4 getting out
science has had many surprises for us in
this pandemic
we've learned that while the vaccines
don't always stop the spread
they do protect the vaccinated from
getting severe disease and death
for a number of months
we've learned
as the new york times points out that
quote an unvaccinated child
is less at risk of serious covet illness
than a vaccinated 70 year old
close quote
though we learned that emily oster the
author and academic who first called
that fact to our attention
was mistreated for months
because she was off narrative
we've also learned that you're safer in
a room
or even on a plane
with people who have recovered from
covid than you are with people who are
vaccinated
especially over four months ago
in other words
the immunity of those who suffered covet
is holding up
so far
so
why doesn't good news like this sink in
i submit it's because of our old friend
the behavioral immune system
many people's mental set for the
pandemic was formed early on when the
behavioral immune system was on fire and
they were schooled by a master narrative
that promised there would be only one
type of person who would not pose a
danger
the vaccinated person
stuck in that mindset when confronted by
unvaccinated people about half of whom
are immune
they respond with
bis-generated fear hostility and
loathing
some take it further and seem almost
addicted to being scared
or remain caught in a kind of
post-traumatic lockdown nostalgia
demanding that all the previous
protections go on indefinitely
never factoring in the costs and
triggering ever more distrust
their minds are hijacked by a primal
archaic cognitively rigid brain circuit
and will not rest until every last
person is vaccinated
to some it started to seem like this is
the mindset not only of a certain cohort
of their fellow citizens
but of the government itself
moreover
because coveted vaccine hesitancy is
based in significant part on distrust of
the government and related institutions
it has to be understood
not only in terms of vaccines
but in the context of the pandemic more
broadly first and foremost in other
words
of the experience of lockdowns
for many
trust was broken by the lockdowns which
devastated small businesses and their
employees even when they complied with
safety rules
such that an estimated one-third of
these businesses that were open in
january of 2020
were closed in april of 2021
even as we kept open huge corporate box
stores where people crowded together
these policies were arguably the biggest
assault on the working classes
many of whom protected the rest of us by
keeping society going in the worst of
the pandemic
in decades
that these policies also enrich the
already incredibly wealthy the combined
wealth of the world's 10 richest men the
likes of jeff bezos mark zuckerberg bill
gates and larry page is estimated to
have risen by 540 billion dollars in the
first 10 months of the pandemic
and that various politicians who
instituted lockdowns were regularly
caught skirting their own regulations
solidified this distrust
and yet
it is the unvaccinated who many leading
officials still portray as recklessly
endangering the rest of the country
quote we're going to protect vaccinated
workers from unvaccinated co-workers
president biden has said
the unvaccinated are now presented as
the sole source of future variants
prolonging the pain for the rest of us
for those in favor of mandates
the vaccine is the only way out of the
crisis
to them the vaccine hesitant are merely
ignorant and defy science
we try to use a voluntary approach
they believe
but these people are neanderthal who
must now be coerced into treatment or be
punished
among the punishments called for is not
just loss of employment but also of
unemployment insurance health care
access to icu beds
even the ability to go to grocery stores
it's not trivial to override the core
felt sense in a democracy
that if anything is one's own it's one's
body
the idea of the state or a doctor
performing a medical procedure forcibly
on a person or drugging them into
compliance without their consent is an
abiding terrifying theme
of many science fiction dystopias
and it's a fear that runs very deep in
the modern psyche
this fear runs deeper in some people
than their fear of the virus or losing
their jobs or pensions as we are seeing
history shows that these are not just
fantasies
past medical and public health abuses
really did make use of forced injections
of drugs operations sterilizations and
even psychiatric abuses in totalitarian
and democratic societies both
moreover
to say to the unvaccinated but it's in
the name of the greater good is to make
the utilitarian argument that we must
strive for the most good for the
greatest number of people
a version of utilitarianism
is often the governing philosophy of
public
health but this raises a series of
questions
how are we measuring the good
is it the same for all people
should it be up to your 89 year old
grandmother who has little time left to
decide whether to spend the remaining
years of her life in total isolation
or risk hovid but see her loved ones
and the bigger questions
can you explain
how you are helping the group when by
overriding individual rights
you degrade the group as a whole by
weakening each individual within it
are you aware
that the greatest evils in history have
also always been done in the name of
that abstraction the greater good
without first answering such questions
utilitarianism is but a shallow form of
arithmetic
one passing itself off as moral
philosophy
it is not irrational for people to
insist that public discourse seriously
engage questions like these
and that any state compulsion related to
people's bodies be based on a flawless
airtight argument that is well
communicated
that has not happened
what in rational political and public
health terms is the state's best
justification for mandating that people
be injected on mass with the medicine
the first justification for mandates is
that they get us to hurt immunity faster
but
as stanford epidemiologist jay
batacharya and arizona state university
economist jonathan ketchum note quote
we have good reason to doubt that if
most everyone got vaccinated we'd
achieve herd immunity close quote
this is because as we've seen
current vaccines are fading at about
five months
even scientists who believe vaccines
will help get us to herd immunity are
divided on what percentage of the
population needs to be vaccinated to get
us there
early in the pandemic fauci said we
needed as low as 60 to 70 percent to
reach herd immunity but as time went on
he increased the numbers
in december 2020
when the new york times noticed fauci
was quote quietly shifting the number
upward close quote
he explained he was generating these
percentages based on a mix of the
science and what he felt the public was
ready to hear admitting quote
we really don't know what the real
number is close quote
president biden recently said we could
need 98 percent of americans to be
vaccinated to reach the goal
is there a scientific consensus behind
the 98 claim
in fact a number of epidemiologists and
infectious disease experts and officials
dispute that we need a number anywhere
near it
even those who are pro-mandate like dr
monica gandhi professor of clinical
medicine at the university of california
san francisco believes that quote there
is no evidence that we need that high of
a vaccination rate 98 percent to get
back to normal close quote
other countries like denmark have opted
for a 74 vaccination rate as acceptable
in order to lift certain restrictions
especially if the most vulnerable are
vaccinated at a higher rate
norway lifted all restrictions when it
got to a 67 vaccination rate
the point here is that the science is
shifting sometimes by the day
it is reasonable for people who notice
this to feel concerned about it and it
is at the very least churlish to present
them as merely
irrational the second justification for
mandates is that the state has an
obligation to protect those who cannot
protect themselves from an infectious
disease passed on to them by others
i.e the unvaccinated do not have a right
to quote recklessly endanger close quote
and infect others
but as many have pointed out it is hard
to describe our current moment quite
this way
since vaccines and now boosters are
freely and widely available so people
can protect themselves if they wish
of course
this reveals the real problem
which is that vaccinated people do not
in fact get comprehensive immunity as in
the case for example of the polio or
measles vaccines
and on this there is increasing
scientific agreement
we can't eradicate this mutating virus
at this point
it is likely not a case like smallpox
which was eradicated because both the
virus and the vaccines met a host of
criteria
donald ainsley henderson who directed
the who smallpox eradication campaign
wrote that smallpox was uniquely suited
for eradication because it didn't exist
in animal reservoirs
it was easy to identify cases in even
the smallest villages by its distinctive
awful rash
so a test for it wasn't needed
the vaccine gave immunity that lasted a
decade
and natural immunity was easy to
identify by the scars smallpox left
covet satisfies none of these conditions
quote if we are forced to choose a
vaccine that gives only one year of
protection close quote said larry
brilliant an epidemiologist also
involved in smallpox elimination
quote then we are doomed to have coveted
become endemic an infection that is
always with us close quote
he and five other scientists have since
argued together that covet is not going
away because it's growing in a dozen
animal species
and variants allow it to pop up in
places that once beat it back
indeed this is the reason that some
scientists argue we need over 90 of
people vaccinated to keep america safe
from a virus that will ping-pong around
the unvaccinated parts of the globe for
years
as brilliant and colleagues wrote
recently quote
among humans global herd immunity
once promoted as a singular solution
is unreachable
close quote
so if it's correct that we can't
eradicate the virus and we can't get
lasting vaccine-induced herd immunity
what is our goal
it would be to use monica gandy's phrase
to get back to normal
it would mean accepting some natural
hurt immunity and putting more focus on
saving lives by other means alongside
vaccines
including better outpatient medications
to catch covet early and keep people out
of the hospital
lowering our individual risk factors
and speeding delivery of vaccines to the
highly vulnerable when an outbreak
occurs and prioritizing them
over people who are already immune
that the justifications originally given
for mass public mandates are so weakened
is one of kovitt's many unexpected
challenges
one that requires flexible thinking
new kinds of planning
and above all acknowledgement
lest its denial becomes yet another
example of bungled trust
in tackling the trust problem generally
we can return to the two kinds of public
health systems
the coercive and the participatory
the united states
has all sorts of mandates but also
continues to have significantly high
rates of vaccine hesitancy and vaccine
avoidance
in contrast sweden is the leading
example of a participatory public health
model
quote
sweden has one of the highest
vaccination rates in the world and the
highest confidence in vaccines in the
world
but there's absolutely no mandate
koldorf again one of the world's leading
epidemiologists
and a specialist in vaccine safety and
consultant to the acip covet 19
vaccine safety technical subgroup notes
quote
if you want to have high confidence in
vaccines
it has to be voluntary
if you force something on people if you
coerce somebody to do something that can
backfire
public health has to be based on trust
if public health officials want the
public to trust them
public health officials also have to
trust the public
close quote
just as pharma's indemnification removed
its incentive to improve safety
so do mandates remove public health
incentive to have better more consistent
communication to listen
understand educate and persuade which is
what builds trust
kaldorf is echoed by demania who is by
my estimate one of the most effective
persuaders of the vaccine hesitant quote
i've been so wrong in the past about
things close quote he noted in a video
quote i actually at one point in my
career felt that shaming anti-vaxxers
was a good idea because they were so
dangerous to children
this was pre-pandemic stuff and it never
works to convince anti-vaxxers
i would rarely ever get emails from
people saying hey i was on the fence and
you convinced me with your crazy rant
about how stupid anti-vaxxers are
then i started to wake up a bit
why is it people feel the way they do
and when you really dig into it you go
i can empathize with that
actually we share the same goal which is
our kids should be healthy
and you really think this is going to
help so of course you're going to in
fact i should love you for trying to do
the right thing for your kids
close quote
indeed
demonizing people for having doubts is
the worst move we can make especially
since there are serious problems in our
drug and vaccine regulatory systems
some health organizations have become
concerned enough about the effects of
non-transparency
that a group has formed made up of the
leslie dan faculty of pharmacy
university of toronto transparency
international
and the who collaborating center for
governance accountability and
transparency in the pharmaceutical
sector in a report released recently
the alliance analyzed 86 registered
clinical vaccine trials across 20
coveted vaccines
and found only 12 percent
have made their protocols available as
of may 2021
scores of key decisions affecting the
public were never made available
the u.s government should immediately
give the public and outside scientists
access to raw data on which studies are
based and the minutes of meetings where
major decisions are made on policies
like mandates
we need the kinds of transparency peter
doshi has asked for from pharma and
kesselheim did from the fda
doshi and some colleagues from oxford
have asked for instance what the
rationale was for the regulatory
agencies to allow pharma companies not
to choose hospitalization death or viral
transmission as endpoints in the
authorization studies
let's see the internal deliberations
let's see the minutes of crucial
meetings
all these researchers are doing
is being true to the motto of the royal
society
the first national scientific
institution ever established
nullius in whereby
take nobody's word for it
acknowledging severe problems in
regulatory agencies or within pharma
doesn't mean believing that everything
that system produces is tainted
or that all the people in those
institutions are corrupt
in fact
it defends those with the most integrity
because it is they who are the most
frustrated by a system that requires
radical restructuring and new leadership
even if
especially if we think of ourselves as
pro-vaccine we should want to rescue
this extraordinary technology from the
flawed and broken system of poor
regulation
insufficiently transparent testing
and manipulative messaging
but now many are choosing instead to
replace this conversation about the
system underlying the vaccine rollout
with vaccine mandates
a strategy that troubles even some of
those who have been very invested in the
success of the vaccines
quote
right now with these vaccine mandates
and vaccine passports
this coercive thing is turning a lot of
people away from vaccines and not
trusting them for very understandable
reasons kaldorf says
quote
those who are pushing these vaccine
mandates and vaccine passports
vaccine fanatics i would call them
to me they have done much more damage
during this one year than the
anti-vaxxers have done in two decades
i would even say that these vaccine
fanatics they are the biggest
anti-vaxxers that we have right now
close quote
those congratulating the united states
on mandates working conveniently leave
out that each of those wins is
potentially a recruit
for a resentful army that does not
believe in vaccines
imagine a scenario already unfolding in
israel
in which regular boosters are deemed
necessary
how easy do you think it will be to drag
those people into this action
every six months
wouldn't it have been more effective to
have enabled them to own these actions
for themselves much earlier
thereby making it more likely that they
would sustain them
there are ways for all of us medical
professionals or not to stop the
bleeding
beginning with changing our orientation
to those who are skeptical
i have to return here to demagna whose
widely watched videos have attempted to
persuade the hesitant to get vaccinated
quote i love the coronavirus vaccines he
has said
quote they work they save lives they
prevent severe disease
immunity is our only way through a
pandemic whether it is naturally being
infected or being vaccinated close quote
and yet he too believes that mandates
are quote going to set back the cause of
vaccination
and increased tribal division close
quote
instead of coercion he offers engagement
when a viewer in the chat or in a
personal email to him raises concerns
demandia doesn't minimize it or go
around the problems he works through
them
he addresses conflicting studies
bringing on some of the world's finest
epidemiologists and public health
experts
and shows us the real world of
physicians and scientists agreeing and
disagreeing
he acknowledges when the science is not
as airtight as officials present
presented
and he doesn't use a one-size-fits-all
approach if he can avoid it
if a person raises a personal health
issue an allergy or an immune issue or
cardiac problem he factors it in and
sometimes a person decides to get the
shot
sometimes they decide not to
and he wishes them well
as a result
people feel listened to and in turn
become more open to listening to what he
has to say whether one agrees with his
advice or not
i often agree or come to agree but not
every time
his respectful approach seems to me
irreproachable
and to judge from the results effective
in addition to primary care physicians
those who are pro-vaccine but not
professionals also have a role to play
here
in acknowledging that some of their
fellow citizens distrust is utterly
warranted
the seemingly bottomless lining of
pharmaceutical pockets
the unconscionable censorship of
scientists
the grotesqueness of seeing the rich
unmasked at a met gala waited on by a
masked servant class
the downsides of and controversy around
masking school children and more
if they are not listened to when they
are obviously right
why would they listen to others
some might come to the end of this essay
and wonder why i so cognizant of all the
problems with the u.s regulatory process
and study transparency got vaccinated
i did so when i had time to think
through my own situation as many
physician friends did
we knew that covert was for many a beast
not taken lightly
like them i used an individualized
approach which ideally everyone should
be able to do with their own physicians
if they have special health issues
for me
this meant taking into account how
prevalent the virus was at the time in
my area
its lethality and possible long-term
effects in someone my own age sex with
my own health history and the
probability of side effects known at the
time and my own response to vaccines in
the past and the fact that i had no
allergies to the additives
there were transparency problems with
the clinical trials which meant there
was a lot we did not know
but already by the time i got my own
shot we did have some knowledge that the
vaccines were lowering deaths
while factoring in my own risk tolerance
i tried not to pretend i knew more than
i really did
about covet or the vaccines
of course governments will not want to
rely on a system in which everyone is
encouraged to go to their physician for
some kind of individualized discussion
but we are not talking about everyone
here
we are talking about people who remain
unconvinced after our public health
system has done its best at a
mass-marketed vaccine campaign
it is a minority of citizens but a
sizable one
we can either choose as we have to
coerce them with economic and social
deprivation
or we can work to better engage them
for tocqueville
the tyranny of the majority over the
minority is the ever-present danger in
democracies
the remedy for which john stuart mill
argued was a protection of minority
rights and above all the right to
continue speaking
even if a majority opinion seemed to be
crystallizing
mill in the end was influenced and
changed by tocqueville's notion of the
tyranny of the majority
and pointed out that the tyranny unique
to democracy gave rise to quote the
peculiar evil of silencing the
expression of an opinion close quote in
the social sphere
in our so-called free societies
it moved him to write his great plea for
free speech in on liberty
quote
protection therefore
against the tyranny of the magistrate is
not enough
there needs protection also against the
tyranny of the prevailing opinion and
feeling
against the tendency of society to
impose
by other means than civil penalties
its own ideas and practices as rules of
conduct on those who dissent from them
to fetter the development and if
possible prevent the formation of any
individuality not in harmony with its
ways
and compel all characters to fashion
themselves upon the model of its own
there is a limit to the legitimate
interference of collective opinion with
individual independence
and to find that limit and maintain it
against encroachment
is as indispensable to a good condition
of human affairs
as protection against political
despotism
close quote
to find that limit and maintain it
becomes the difficult but essential task
when a plague besets a democracy
especially one that wishes to remain in
good enough condition
to survive it
needle points the article
plus all the links to the references
is available at tabletmag.com